Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 2(2) of the Transport and Works Act 1992, for approval by resolution of each House of Parliament.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. 0000
TRANSPORT AND WORKS
The Transport and Works (Guided Transport Modes) (Amendment) Order 2022
Made
2022
Coming into force
2022
The Secretary of State in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2(1) and (2) of the Transport and Works Act 1992(1), makes the following Order, a draft of which has been approved by resolution of each House of Parliament:
(1)
1992 c. 42.Citation and commencement
1.  This Order may be cited as the Transport and Works (Guided Transport Modes) (Amendment) Order 2022 and comes into force on the seventh day after the day on which it is made.Amendment of the Transport and Works (Guided Transport Modes) Order 1992
2.—(1) The Transport and Works (Guided Transport Modes) Order 1992(1) is amended as follows.
(2) In article 2 (prescribed modes), after sub-paragraph (f) insert—
“(g)
road-based with sensor guidance;
(h)
road-based with side guidance;
(i)
track-based with sensor guidance;
(j)
track-based with side guidance.”.
(3) In article 3(1) (interpretation), after the definition of “road-based with rail guidance” insert—
““road-based with sensor guidance” means a mode in which the vehicles—
(a)
are capable of operating on a road; and
(b)
are guided wholly or mainly by means of sensors on the vehicles which, by reference to the vehicles’ external environment or to the receipt of electromagnetic information, provide data which is used to guide the vehicles;
“road-based with side guidance” means a mode in which the vehicles—
(a)
are capable of operating on a road; and
(b)
are guided wholly or mainly by means of wheels bearing outwards against fixed apparatus;
“track-based with sensor guidance” means a mode in which the vehicles—
(a)
are supported by means of a track or other structure not being a road; and
(b)
are guided wholly or mainly by means of sensors which, by reference to the vehicles’ external environment or to the receipt of electromagnetic information, provide data which is used to guide the vehicles; and
“track-based with side guidance” means a mode in which the vehicles—
(a)
are supported by means of a track or other structure not being a road; and
(b)
are guided wholly or mainly by means of wheels bearing outwards against fixed apparatus.”.
(4) For article 3(2), substitute—
“(2) In this Order—
“electromagnetic information” means information that is conveyed by some kind of radiation including radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, x-rays and gamma rays;
“goods” has the same meaning as in Part 1 (the provision of railway services) of the Railways Act 1993(2);
“mode” means a mode of guided transport which employs vehicles used for the carriage of passengers or goods;
“road” has the same meaning as in the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(3).”.
(1)
S.I. 1992/3231 was amended by S.I. 1997/1951.
(2)
1993 c. 43.
(3)
1984 c. 27.Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport
Name
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
Department for Transport
DateEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order amends the Transport and Works (Guided Transport Modes) Order 1992 (S.I. 1992/3231) so as to include in article 2 modes of transport that are guided by sensory technology in contrast to the existing modes of transport that are physically guided; and to include in article 3 definitions of those modes of transport.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, public or voluntary sector is foreseen.
An Explanatory Memorandum for this instrument has been published alongside this Order at www.legislation.gov.uk.