STATUTORY RULES OF NORTHERN IRELAND
2019 No. 74
ROAD TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
The Disabled Persons (Badges for Motor Vehicles) (Amendment) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2019
Made
29th March 2019
Coming into operation-
30th March 2019
The Department for Infrastructure(1) makes the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by section 14(1), (7) and (10) of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons (Northern Ireland) Act 1978(2) and now vested in it(3).
(1)
2016 c. 5 (N.I.)
(2)
1978 c. 53 as amended by S.I. 1981/154 (N.I. 1) Sch. 7, para. 21; S.I. 1997/276 (N.I. 2) Article 55, Sch. 8, para. 3 and Sch. 9 and S.I. 2005/1964 (N.I. 14) Article 32
(3)
S.R. 1999 No. 481 Article 6(d) and Schedule 4 Part IVCitation and commencement
1.  These Regulations may be cited as The Disabled Persons (Badges for Motor Vehicles) (Amendment) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2019 and shall come into operation on 30th March 2019.Amendments
2.—(1) The Disabled Persons (Badge for Motor Vehicles) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1993(1) is amended in accordance with paragraphs (2) and (3).
(2) For Regulation 3 (form of badge) substitute the following—
“Form of badge
3.—(1) Paragraph (2) applies in respect of a badge with a date of issue on or after 30th March 2019.
(2) A disabled person’s badge is in the prescribed form if—
(a)
the front and reverse of the badge are in the form shown in—
(i)
diagram 1 in Part I of the Schedule in the case of an individual’s badge (with the omission of the word “sample” where it appears); or
(ii)
diagram 2 in Part I of the Schedule in the case of an organisational badge (with the omission of the word “sample” where it appears); and
(b)
The badge mentioned in paragraph (2) complies with the specifications set out in Part II of the Schedule.”
(3) For the Schedule to those Regulations substitute the Schedule to these Regulations.
(1)
S.R. 1993 No. 202: relevant amending Regulations are S.R. 2000 No. 59, S.R. 2008 No. 501, S.R. 2016 No. 30 and S.R. 2016 No. 173Transitional provisions
3.  Nothing in regulation 2 shall affect the validity of a badge which—
(a)
was issued before the coming into operation of these Regulations; and
(b)
was in a form which complied with the Disabled Persons (Badges for Motor Vehicles) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1993 at the time of its issue.Sealed with the Official Seal of the Department for Infrastructure on 29th March 2019
(L.S.)
T Reid
A senior officer of the Department for InfrastructureRegulation 2(3)
SCHEDULE
Regulation 3
“SCHEDULE
PART I
DIAGRAM 1
Form of Badge for an individual (with a date of issue on or after 30th March 2019)
DIAGRAM 2
Form of Badge for a Support Organisation (with a date of issue on or after 30th March 2019)
PART II
Specifications for Badges
All badges
1.  The specifications applicable to all badges are as follows—
(a)
the badge shall be 106 millimetres in height, 148 millimetres in width (with 5mm radius rounded corners) and 720 microns in thickness, with height and width tolerances of plus or minus 1 millimetre and a thickness tolerance of plus or minus 20 microns;
(b)
the badge shall be printed on white polyvinyl chloride core sheets and all print shall be fused with clear plastic outer layers;
(c)
the badge shall be printed with a unique serial number, comprising a series of numbers and letters that identify key information about the badge and the holder, including the consecutive number of each replacement badge issued to the badge holder by the issuing authority;
(d)
the background on the front and reverse sides of the badge shall be lithographically security printed to include fine line guilloche, numismatics, variable width text workings and other fine line structures which are consistent with paragraph (l);
(e)
a security printed, tamper evident background shall be printed in the boxes which identify the expiry date and number of the badge and the name of the holder;
(f)
micro text features which are only visible under magnification shall be printed on the front and reverse sides of the badge;
(g)
embossed tactile and Braille features (which incorporate visual, line structure patterns) shall be included on the front side of the badge, without any corresponding indentation on the reverse side of the badge;
(h)
the wheelchair user symbol that appears on the front side of the badge shall be a security hologram enclosed within a square with sides each measuring 30 millimetres, incorporating an image flip, micro-text, nano-text, a separate nano-feature and the design of the wheelchair logo against a background of the words “blue badge”;
(i)
the rear side of the badge shall contain a variable bar code which identifies the expiry date of the badge;
(j)
the coloured block which appears on the front side of all badges issued during any calendar year shall be a consistent year identifier colour which differs substantially from the colours used in prior calendar years;
(k)
the badge shall be constructed so that it is heat resistant and stable to a temperature of at least 120 degrees Celsius (and a local authority shall satisfy itself that badges it proposes to issue are compliant with this requirement (before issuing any such badges) by obtaining a report verifying such compliance (by reference to a sample badge) from an appropriate body);
(l)
the badge shall include such additional security features as will further mitigate the risk of forgery by, so far as practicable, preventing the badge from being copied readily and allowing genuine badges to be distinguished from forgeries.
For the purposes of paragraph (k) an “appropriate body” means a body accredited to Standard ISO 9001:2008 (Quality Management Systems) (prepared by the International Organization for Standardization(1)) and which, in the opinion of the local authority, has the necessary expertise to provide the report.
Individuals Badges
2.  The additional specifications applicable to an individual’s badge are as follows—
(a)
Subject to paragraphs (b) and (c), the rear side of an individual’s badge shall contain a close-up digital photograph of the head and shoulders of the badge holder. The photograph shall have a strong definition between face and background and shall be—
(i)
in colour;
(ii)
45 millimetres in height and 35 millimetres in width (passport size);
(iii)
taken—
(aa)
within the month prior to the date of the application;
(bb)
against a light grey or cream background;
(iv)
undamaged;
(v)
free from ‘redeye’, shadows, reflection or glare from spectacles;
(vi)
of the full head of the holder (without any other person visible or any covering, unless it is worn for religious beliefs or medical reasons)—
(aa)
facing forward;
(bb)
with nothing covering the face;
(cc)
looking straight at the camera;
(dd)
with a neutral expression and mouth closed;
(ee)
with eyes open and clearly visible (without sunglasses or tinted spectacles and without hair or spectacle frames obscuring the eyes);
(vii)
in sharp focus and clear;
(viii)
printed professionally or in digital format;
(ix)
a true likeness, without amendment.
(b)
Paragraph (a) does not apply to a badge issued pursuant to an application made by a disabled person if the issuing authority is satisfied that the estimated life expectancy of that person is less than six months from the date of the application, in which case the space that would otherwise include a photograph shall contain a copy of the flag that appears on the front of the badge.
(c)
Paragraphs (a)(vi)(cc) and (a)(vi)(dd) do not apply to photographs of children aged five years and under.
(d)
The variable bar code on the rear side of the badge shall identify the year of birth and (in code) the gender of the holder.
(e)
The serial number printed on the badge shall identify the month and year of birth and (in code) the gender of the holder.
Organisational Badges
3.  The additional specifications applicable to an organisational badge are as follows—
(a)
The reverse side of an organisational badge shall contain a colour copy of the logo (if any) of the organisation, which shall be 45 millimetres in height and 35 millimetres in width. If the organisation does not have a logo, the space that would otherwise include the logo shall contain a copy of the flag that appears on the front of the badge.”
(1)
The British Standards Institution publication of the Standard has the ISBN 9780580687389EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
These Regulations further amend the Disabled Persons (Badges for Motor Vehicles) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1993 by changing the form of the badge with effect from 30th March 2019.