Draft Regulations laid before the Scottish Parliament under section 42(2) of the Carers (Scotland) Act 2016, for approval by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
DRAFT SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2018 No.
SOCIAL CARE
The Carers (Scotland) Act 2016 (Adult Carers and Young Carers: Identification of Outcomes and Needs for Support) Regulations 2018
Made
2018
Coming into force
1st April 2018
The Scottish Ministers make the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 8 and 14 of the Carers (Scotland) Act 2016(1) and all other powers enabling them to do so.
In accordance with section 42(2) of that Act, a draft of this instrument has been laid before and approved by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
(1)
2016 asp 9.Citation and commencement
1.  These Regulations may be cited as the Carers (Scotland) Act 2016 (Adult Carers and Young Carers: Identification of Outcomes and Needs for Support) Regulations 2018 and come into force on 1st April 2018.Adult carers: identification of outcomes and needs for support
2.—(1) Identification of an adult carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be carried out by the responsible local authority.
(2) An adult carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be identified through conversation between the responsible local authority and the adult carer.
(3) An adult carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be reviewed when the adult carer support plan is reviewed.Young carers: identification of outcomes and needs for support
3.—(1) Identification of a young carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be carried out by the responsible authority.
(2) A young carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be identified through conversation between the responsible authority and the young carer.
(3) A young carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support must be reviewed when the young carer statement is reviewed.Name
Authorised to sign on behalf of the Scottish Ministers
St Andrew’s House,
Edinburgh
DateEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations are made under the Carers (Scotland) Act 2016 and come into force on 1st April 2018.
Regulation 2 makes provision about the identification of an adult carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support.
Regulation 3 makes provision about the identification of a young carer’s personal outcomes and needs for support.