Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Worcester (Electoral Changes) Order 2024
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated August 2023(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the city of Worcester(4). The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/worcester.
(4)
At an Extraordinary Meeting of Worcester City Council held on 22 February 2022, the Council resolved to adopt, from May 2024, a new scheme for whole council elections under section 34 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (c. 28), having previously elected by thirds. An explanatory document is available for public inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of Worcester City Council, Guildhall, High Street, Worcester WR1 2EY. It is also accessible online at https://www.worcester.gov.uk.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Worcester (Electoral Changes) Order 2024.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2024.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Worcester (Electoral Changes) Order 2024”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.worcester.gov.uk.Wards of the city of Worcester and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the city of Worcester are abolished.
(2) The city of Worcester is divided into the 16 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parish of Warndon
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parish of Warndon are abolished.
(2) The parish of Warndon is divided into the two parish wards listed in Schedule 2.
(3) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is 4.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the city of Worcester and number of councillors
(1) Name of ward (2) Number of councillors
Arboretum 2
Battenhall 2
Cathedral 2
Claines 3
Dines Green & Grove Farm 2
Fort Royal 2
Leopard Hill 2
Lower Wick & Pitmaston 2
Nunnery 3
Rainbow Hill 2
St Clement 2
St John’s 2
St Nicholas 2
St Peter’s Parish 2
St Stephen 2
Warndon & Elbury Park 3Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Name of parish wards
1.  Warndon Villages North
2.  Warndon Villages SouthEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the city of Worcester following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the city of Worcester remains unchanged.
At an Extraordinary Meeting of Worcester City Council held on 22 February 2022, the Council resolved to adopt, from May 2024, a new scheme for whole council elections, under section 34 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (c. 28) having previously elected by thirds. This change in electoral cycle was taken account of by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England in its recommendations. An explanatory document is available for public inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of Worcester City Council, Guildhall, High Street, Worcester WR1 2EY.
The explanatory document may also be accessed at https://www.worcester.gov.uk.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the city of Worcester and replaces them with 16 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3. The changes to parish wards introduced by article 4 come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2024.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.worcester.gov.uk.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.