S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2020 No. 132 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Durham (Educational Endowments) (Venerable 
Bede Church of England School) Order 2020 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10th February 2020 
Coming into force in accordance with article 1 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Venerable Bede Church of 
England School in the county of Durham (“the foundation”) is or has been held in connection with 
the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 30 October 1899 and made between (1) The 
Ecclesiastical Commissioners for England and (2) Henry William Barber (Vicar) and William 
Henry Challoner (Church Warden). 
The assets representing the said endowment of the foundation consist of (a) £106,042.10 being the 
net proceeds of sale of the former school premises and held on deposit at NatWest Bank Plc and 
(b) any income derived from those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the said endowment has been made 
to the Secretary of State by the foundation’s trustees the Durham Diocesan Board of Finance, 
which body appears to the Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of 
England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b): 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c.56. 
(b) Section 554 is amended by paragraph 168 of Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c.31) and 
section 556 is amended by paragraph 169 of that Schedule. 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Durham (Educational Endowments) (Venerable 
Bede Church of England School) Order 2020 and comes into force on the day after the day on 
which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order- 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation being a deed dated 30th October 1899 and made 
between (1) The Ecclesiastical Commissioners for England and (2) Henry William Barber 
(Vicar) and William Henry Challoner (Church Warden); 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Durham Diocesan Board of Finance; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Venerable Bede Church of 
England School; 
“relevant school” means a foundation or voluntary school in the Diocese of Durham at which 
religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is or is to be 
provided; and 
“trust assets” means the sum of £106,042.10 representing the proceeds of sale of the premises 
of the Venerable Bede Church of England School held on deposit at NatWest Bank Plc, 
together with any income derived therefrom (whether before or after the operative date). 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) All the funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the 
operative date shall be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose 
shall be done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4. The trustees may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes – 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school; 
(b) the maintenance of any relevant school; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school; 
(d) the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school; 
(e) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school; 
(f) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school 
required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(g) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with the application of 
capital or income of the trust assets for any purposes referred to in paragraphs (a) to (f). 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c.18. 
 
3
Signed by the authority of the Secretary of State 
 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
10th February 2020 
Department for Education 
 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Durham Diocesan Board of Finance as trustee of the foundation known as 
Venerable Bede Church of England School and makes new provision as to the use of the 
endowment of that foundation.  
The Order provides for the trust assets to be used for the benefit of Church of England voluntary 
schools and foundation schools in the Diocese of Durham. 
