Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 0000
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The New Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated January 2021 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for New Forest District Council. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the New Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the New Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/hampshire/new-forestWards of the district of the New Forest and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of the New Forest are abolished.
(2) The district of the New Forest is divided into the 26 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Fawley, Hythe & Dibden, Lymington & Pennington, New Milton, Ringwood and Totton & Eling
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Fawley, Hythe & Dibden, Lymington & Pennington, New Milton, Ringwood and Totton and Eling are abolished.
(2) The parish of Fawley is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Hythe & Dibden is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Lymington & Pennington is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of New Milton is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Ringwood is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) The parish of Totton & Eling is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of table 6 in Schedule 2.
(8) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(9) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of wards and number of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ashley, Bashley & Fernhill 2
Ashurst, Bramshaw, Copythorne & Netley Marsh 2
Ballard 1
Barton & Becton 2
Bransgore, Burley, Sopley & Ringwood East 2
Brockenhurst & Denny Lodge 1
Dibden & Dibden Purlieu 2
Downlands & Forest North 1
Fawley, Blackfield, Calshot & Langley 2
Fordingbridge, Godshill & Hyde 2
Forest & Solent 1
Hardley, Holbury & North Blackfield 2
Hythe Central 2
Hythe South 2
Lymington 2
Lyndhurst & Minstead 1
Marchwood & Eling 2
Milford & Hordle 3
Milton 2
Pennington 2
Ringwood North & Ellingham 2
Ringwood South 2
Sway 1
Totton Central 2
Totton North 3
Totton South 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Fawley
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Blackfield & Langley 5
Calshot 1
Fawley 2
Hardley 1
Holbury 6
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Hythe & Dibden
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Butts Ash 2
Dibden 2
Dibden Purlieu 2
Furzedown 1
Hythe East 2
Hythe West 3
Langdown 1
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Lymington & Pennington
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Buckland 3
Lymington 5
Pennington 7
Table 4
Wards of the parish of New Milton
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ashley North 2
Ashley South 2
Ballard 3
Barton & Becton 5
Bashley 1
Milton 5
Table 5
Wards of the parish of Ringwood
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ringwood East 1
Ringwood North 6
Ringwood South 7
Table 6
Wards of the parish of Totton & Eling
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Totton Central 1
Totton East 4
Totton North 4
Totton South 3
Totton South East 2
Totton South West 3
Totton West 3EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of the New Forest following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district of the New Forest remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of the New Forest and replaces them with 26 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential on the changes made by article 3. The changes to parish wards introduced by article 4 come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2023.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/hampshire/new-forest
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.