STATUTORY RULES OF NORTHERN IRELAND
2024 No. 114
GOVERNMENT RESOURCES AND ACCOUNTS
The Government Resources and Accounts (Northern Ireland) Act 2001 (Estimates and Accounts) (Designation of Bodies) Order 2024
Made
16th May 2024
Coming into operation
6th June 2024
The Department of Finance (1), in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 8A and 8B of the Government Resources and Accounts Act (Northern Ireland) 2001 (2), makes the following Order.
In accordance with section 8A(5) of the Act the Department of Finance have consulted, where they think it appropriate, with the Treasury.
(1)
Formerly the Department of Finance and Personnel renamed the Department of Finance by section 1(4) of, and Schedule 1 to, the Departments Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 (c.5 (NI))
(2)
2001 (c.6) (NI), sections 8A and 8B were inserted by the Financial Reporting (Department and Public Bodies) Act (Northern Ireland) 2022 (c.8)Title and commencement
1.  This Order may be cited as the Government Resources and Accounts (Northern Ireland) Act 2001 (Estimates and Accounts) (Designation of Bodies) Order 2024 and shall come into operation on 6th June 2024.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 1 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1Amendments to the principal Order
2.  A body which is listed in a Part of the Schedule to this Order is a designated body for the purposes of sections 8A and 8B of the Government Resources and Accounts (Northern Ireland) Act 2001—
(a)
in relation to the department named in the heading to that Part, and
(b)
for the financial year which ends on 31st March 2025.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 2 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1Sealed with the Official Seal of the Department of Finance on 16th May 2024
Barry Armstrong
A senior officer of the
Department of FinanceArticle 2
SCHEDULE
DESIGNATED BODIES FOR 2024-2025
PART 1
Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs
Commencement Information
I1
Sch. Pt. 1 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute
Livestock and Meat Commission for Northern Ireland
Loughs Agency of the Foyle, Carlingford and Irish Lights Commission
Northern Ireland Fishery Harbour Authority
PART 2
Department for Communities
Commencement Information
I2
Sch. Pt. 2 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Armagh Observatory and Planetarium
Arts Council of Northern Ireland
Charities Advisory Committee
Charity Commission for Northern Ireland
Commissioner for Older People for Northern Ireland
Historic Buildings Council
Historic Monuments Council
Local Government Boundaries Commission
Local Government Staff Commission for Northern Ireland
Ministerial Advisory Group, Architecture and Built Environment for Northern Ireland
National Museums and Galleries of Northern Ireland (National Museums NI)
Northern Ireland Commissioner for Children and Young People
Northern Ireland Housing Executive
Northern Ireland Library Authority (Libraries NI)
Northern Ireland Local Government Officers’ Superannuation Committee
Northern Ireland Museums Council
North/South Language Body
Office of the Discretionary Support Commissioner
Rent Assessment Panel
Sports Council for Northern Ireland (Sport NI)
Ulster Supported Employment Limited
PART 3
Department for the Economy
Commencement Information
I3
Sch. Pt. 3 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Belfast Metropolitan College (BMC)
Construction Industry Training Board (CITBNI)
General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland
Health and Safety Executive for Northern Ireland
The Trade and Business Development Body (trading as IntertradeIreland)
Invest Northern Ireland
Labour Relations Agency (LRA)
Northern Ireland Screen Commission
Northern Ireland Tourist Board (trading as Tourism Northern Ireland)
Northern Regional College (NRC)
North West Regional College (NWRC)
South Eastern Regional College (SERC)
Southern Regional College (SRC)
South West College (SWC)
Stranmillis University College
Tourism Ireland Company Limited by Guarantee (trading as Tourism Ireland)
PART 4
Department of Education
Commencement Information
I4
Sch. Pt. 4 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Comhairle na Gaelscolaíochta
Council for Catholic Maintained Schools
Education Authority
Exceptional Circumstances Body
General Teaching Council for Northern Ireland
Grant Maintained Integrated Schools
Middletown Centre for Autism
Middletown Centre for Autism (Holding) Ltd
Northern Ireland Council for Integrated Education
Northern Ireland Council for the Curriculum, Examinations and Assessment
Voluntary Grammar Schools
Youth Council for Northern Ireland
PART 5
Department of Finance
Commencement Information
I5
Sch. Pt. 5 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Civil Service Appeals Board (CSAB)
Legal Services Oversight Commissioner (LSOC)
Northern Ireland Building Regulations Advisory Committee (NIBRAC)
Northern Ireland Civil Service Pension Board (NICSPB)
Northern Ireland Fiscal Council
Procurement Board
Special EU Programmes Body (SEUPB)
Statistics Advisory Committee (SAC)
PART 6
Department of Health
Commencement Information
I6
Sch. Pt. 6 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Belfast Health and Social Care Trust
Charitable trusts the trustees of which are the Health and Social Care Trusts (as established under the Health and Personal Social Services (NI) Order 1972)
Charitable trusts the trustees of which are the Northern Ireland Blood Transfusion Service (as established under the Health and Personal Social Services (NI) Order 1972)
Children’s Court Guardian Agency for Northern Ireland
Food Safety Promotion Board (known as safefood)
Health and Social Care Regulation and Quality Improvement Authority
Northern Health and Social Care Trust
Northern Ireland Ambulance Service Health and Social Care Trust
Northern Ireland Blood Transfusion Service
Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service Board
Northern Ireland Medical and Dental Training Agency
Northern Ireland Practice and Education Council for Nursing and Midwifery
Northern Ireland Social Care Council
Patient and Client Council
Regional Business Services Organisation
South Eastern Health and Social Care Trust
Southern Health and Social Care Trust
The Institute of Public Health in Ireland CLG
Western Health and Social Care Trust
PART 7
Department for Infrastructure
Commencement Information
I7
Sch. Pt. 7 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Waterways Ireland
PART 8
Department of Justice
Commencement Information
I8
Sch. Pt. 8 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Care Tribunal
Commissioner for Hearings under Prison Rule 109B
Criminal Injuries Compensation Appeals Panel for Northern Ireland
Criminal Justice Inspection Northern Ireland (CJINI)
Forensic Science Northern Ireland (FSNI)
The Tribunal established under Schedule 11 to the Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) Order 1972
Independent Assessor of Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) Recruitment Vetting
Independent Monitoring Board
Lands Tribunal
Legal Services Agency Northern Ireland (LSANI)
Northern Ireland Charity Tribunal
Northern Ireland Courts and Tribunals Service (NICTS)
Northern Ireland Health and Safety Tribunal
Northern Ireland Judicial Pension Board
Northern Ireland Judicial Pension Scheme
Northern Ireland Judicial Pension Scheme Advisory Board
Northern Ireland Law Commission
Northern Ireland Police Fund (NIPF)
Northern Ireland Policing Board (NIPB)
Northern Ireland Prison Service (NIPS)
Northern Ireland Traffic Penalty Tribunal
Northern Ireland Valuation Tribunal
Office of the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland (OPONI)
Parole Commissioners Secretariat
Pensions Appeal Commissioners
Pensions Appeal Tribunal
Planning and Water Appeals Commissions (PACWAC)
Police Rehabilitation and Retraining Trust (PRRT)
Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI)
Prisoner Ombudsman for Northern Ireland
Probation Board for Northern Ireland (PBNI)
PSNI Police Pension
Review Tribunal
RUC George Cross Foundation
Social Security and Child Support Commissioners
Special Educational Needs and Disability Tribunal
State Pathologist’s Department
Youth Justice Agency (YJA)
PART 9
The Executive Office
Commencement Information
I9
Sch. Pt. 9 in operation at 6.6.2024, see art. 1
Attorney General for Northern Ireland (AGNI)
Commission for Victims and Survivors for Northern Ireland (CVS)
Commissioner for Public Bodies (CPANI)
Commissioner for Survivors of Institutional Childhood Abuse
Equality Commission for Northern Ireland (ECNI)
Maze/Long Kesh Development Corporation (MLKDC)
Northern Ireland Community Relations Council (CRCNI)
Northern Ireland Judicial Appointments Commission (NIJAC)
North-South Ministerial Council (NSMC)
Strategic Investment Board Limited (SIB)
The Historical Institutional Abuse Redress Board
Victims and Survivors Service Limited (VSS)
Victims’ Payment BoardEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
This Order designates specified central government bodies in relation to named government departments for the purpose of this departments’ supply estimates and resource accounts.
The designations have effect for the financial year that ends on 31st March 2025.
An impact assessment has not been prepared for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sector is foreseen. An Explanatory Memorandum is available alongside the instrument on www.legislation.gov.uk.