W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 702 (W. 138) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A487 Trunk Road (Treborth 
Road, Bangor, Gwynedd) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions & 
Restrictions) Order 2018 
Made 
7 June 2018 
Coming into force 
13 June 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A487 
Fishguard to Bangor Trunk Road, are satisfied that 
traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road should be 
prohibited and/or restricted because of works proposed 
on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation  
1. The title of this Order is the A487 Trunk Road 
(Treborth Road, Bangor, Gwynedd) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions & Restrictions) Order 2018 and it 
comes into force on 13 June 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; and 
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A487 
Fishguard to Bangor Trunk Road;  
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means that 
period commencing at 20:00 hours on 13 June 
2018 and ending when the temporary traffic signs 
are permanently removed. 
(2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered article 
is a reference to the article bearing that number in this 
Order. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, to proceed on the lengths of the trunk road 
specified in the Schedule to this Order. 
4. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 40 miles per hour on the lengths of the trunk 
road specified in the Schedule to this Order. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 10 miles per hour on the lengths of the trunk 
road specified in the Schedule to this Order. 
6. No person may, during the works period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, in such a way that it overtakes any other 
vehicle on the lengths of the trunk road specified in the 
Schedule to this Order during such times as the 
restriction in article 5 is in force. 
Suspension 
7. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
the Schedule to this Order are suspended during such 
times as the restrictions specified in articles 4 and 5 are 
in operation. 
 
3
Application 
8.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 
3, 4, 5 and 6 apply only during such times and to such 
extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply to       
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
9. The maximum duration of this Order is 12 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers.  
 
Dated the                                              7 June 2018 
 
 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Asset Management and Standards 
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
 
The length of the trunk road known as Treborth Road, 
Bangor, Gwynedd that extends from its junction with 
the southern side of Antelope Roundabout to its 
junction 
with 
the 
northern 
side 
of 
Treborth 
Roundabout. 
 
The entire lengths of the A487 southbound entry slip 
road at Antelope Roundabout and A487 northbound 
entry slip road at Treborth Roundabout. 
