W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 305 (W. 59) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A5 Trunk Road (Tŷ Hyll 
Bridge, Capel Curig, Conwy 
County Borough) (Temporary 
Speed Restrictions & No 
Overtaking) Order 2018 
Made 
5 March 2018 
Coming into force 
12 March 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the 
relevant length of the A5 London to Holyhead Trunk 
Road, are satisfied that traffic on a specified length of 
the trunk road should be restricted and/or prohibited 
because of works proposed on or near the road and 
because of a likelihood of a danger to the public. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation 
1. The title of this Order is The A5 Trunk Road (Tŷ 
Hyll Bridge, Capel Curig, Conwy County Borough) 
(Temporary Speed Restrictions & No Overtaking) 
Order 2018 and it comes into force on 12 March 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; and 
                                                                               
(1) 1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and Schedule 
1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, and paragraph 30 
of Schedule 11 to, the Government of Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these 
powers are now exercisable by the Welsh Ministers in relation to 
Wales. 
 
 
2
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A5 
London to Holyhead Trunk Road at Capel Curig in 
the County Borough of Conwy that extends from 
its junction with the access road to Capel Curig 
Training Camp to its junction with the dwelling 
known as Craig Forris;  
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent periods commencing at 07:30 hours on 
12 March 2018 and ending when the temporary 
traffic signs for each period of works are removed. 
(2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered article 
is a reference to the article bearing that number in this 
Order. 
Restrictions and Prohibition 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 40 miles per hour on the length of the trunk 
road. 
4. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 10 miles per hour on the length of the trunk 
road. 
5. No person may, during the works period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, in such a way that it overtakes any other 
vehicle on the length of the trunk road during such 
times as the restriction referred to in article 4 is in 
operation. 
Suspension 
6. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the length of the trunk road are suspended 
 
3
during such times as the restrictions specified in 
articles 3 and 4 are in operation. 
Application 
7.—(1) The restrictions and prohibition in articles 3, 
4 and 5 apply only during such times and to such 
extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply to       
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
8. The maximum duration of this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers.  
 
Dated the                                       5 March 2018 
 
 
 
Nina Ley 
Head of Business Unit, Network Management 
Welsh Government 
