W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 350 (W. 65) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A465 Trunk Road (Dowlais 
Top Roundabout, Merthyr Tydfil to 
Aberdulais Interchange, Neath Port 
Talbot) (Temporary Prohibition of 
Vehicles, Cyclists & Pedestrians) 
Order 2018 
 
Made 
8 February 2018 
Coming into Force 
12 February 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, being the traffic authority for the 
A465 Neath to Abergavenny Trunk Road, are satisfied 
that traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road 
should be prohibited because of works proposed on or 
near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1) and (4) 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this 
Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation  
1. The title of this Order is The A465 Trunk Road 
(Dowlais Top Roundabout, Merthyr Tydfil to 
Aberdulais 
Interchange, 
Neath 
Port 
Talbot) 
(Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles, Cyclists & 
Pedestrians) Order 2018 and it comes into force on 12 
February 2018. 
2.  (1) In this Order:  
 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means any 
vehicle being used by the emergency services or in 
connection with the works giving rise to this Order; 
 
(1) 1984 c.27; Section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic           
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, and 
paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of Wales Act 2006 
(c.32), these powers are now exercisable by the Welsh Ministers in 
relation to Wales. 
 
2
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A465 
Neath to Abergavenny Trunk Road;  
 
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent periods commencing at 20:00 hours on 12 
February 2018 and ending when the temporary traffic 
signs for each period of works are removed. 
 
    (2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered 
article or Schedule is a reference to the article or 
Schedule bearing that number in this Order. 
Prohibitions 
    3.  No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, to proceed in the lengths of the trunk road 
specified in the Schedule. 
    4.  No person may, during the works period, ride or 
cause to be ridden, any pedal cycle in the lengths of 
the trunk road specified in the Schedule.Duration of 
this Order 
    5. No pedestrian may, during the works period, 
proceed in the lengths of the trunk road specified in the 
Schedule. 
Application 
6.  The prohibitions of article 3, 4 and 5 applies only 
during such times and to such extent as indicated by 
traffic signs. 
Duration of this Order 
7. The maximum duration for this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
 
Dated                                       8 February 2018   
 
 
 
Nina Ley 
Head of Business Unit, Network Management  
Welsh Government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
SCHEDULE 
1. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Dowlais Top 
Roundabout to its junction with the north-eastern side 
of Cefn-coed-y-cymmer Roundabout. 
2. The length of the eastbound entry road of the trunk 
road at Pant Industrial Estate Junction that extends 
from a point 12 metres south of its junction with Pant 
Industrial Estate Road to its junction with the main 
eastbound carriageway of the trunk road. 
3. The length of the westbound entry road of the trunk 
road at Pant Industrial Estate Junction that extends 
from a point 50 metres north of its junction with 
Rocky Road to its junction with the main westbound 
carriageway of the trunk road. 
4. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Cefn-coed-y-cymmer 
Roundabout to its junction with the eastern side of 
Hirwaun Roundabout. 
5. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Hirwaun Roundabout 
to its junction with the south-eastern side of Rhigos 
Roundabout. 
6. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Rhigos Roundabout to the nosing of 
the 
westbound 
entry 
slip 
road 
at 
Glynneath 
Interchange.  
7. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the 
eastbound exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to its 
junction with the western side of Rhigos Roundabout. 
8. The entire lengths of the westbound and eastbound 
entry slip roads at Glynneath Interchange. 
9. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the western 
exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to its junction 
with the eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout. 
10. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout to the nosing 
 
4
of the eastbound entry slip road at Glynneath 
Interchange. 
11. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Cwmgwrach 
Roundabout to its junction with the eastern side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
12. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Resolven Roundabout to the nosing  of 
the westbound entry slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange.  
13. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road (including the eastbound entry slip road at 
Aberdulais Interchange) that extends from the nosing 
of the northbound exit slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange to its junction with the western side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
