W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 471 (W. 80) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A55 Trunk Road 
(Penmaenbach Tunnel, Conwy 
County Borough) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions & Restrictions) 
Order 2018 
Made 
6 April 2018 
Coming into force 
10 April 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the 
relevant length of the A55 Chester to Bangor Trunk 
Road, are satisfied that traffic on specified lengths of 
the trunk road should be prohibited and/or restricted 
because of works proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation 
1. The title of this Order is the A55 Trunk Road 
(Penmaenbach Tunnel, Conwy County Borough) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions & Restrictions) Order 
2018 and it comes into force on 10 April 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; and 
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26) section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A55 
Chester to Bangor Trunk Road; 
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent  periods commencing at 19:00 hours 
on 10 April 2018 and ending when the temporary 
traffic signs for each period of works are removed. 
(2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered article 
or Schedule is a reference to the article or Schedule 
bearing that number in this Order. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, to be driven on either the eastbound or 
westbound carriageways of the length of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 1. 
4.—(1) Whilst vehicle movement is, by article 3, 
prohibited on the eastbound carriageway, but pursuant 
to article 15, not prohibited on the westbound 
carriageway, no person may drive so as to cause or 
permit any motor vehicle to: 
(a) proceed in the offside lane of the westbound 
carriageway in any direction other than 
eastwards; 
(b) proceed in any direction other than eastwards  
through either of the gaps in the central 
reservation of the length of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 3. 
(2) Whilst vehicle movement is, by article 3, 
prohibited on the westbound carriageway, but pursuant 
to article 15, not prohibited on the eastbound 
carriageway, no person may drive so as to cause or 
permit any motor vehicle to: 
(a) proceed in the offside lane of the eastbound 
carriageway in any direction other than 
westwards; 
 
3
(b) overtake any motor vehicle on the length of 
the trunk road specified in Schedule 2; 
(c) proceed in any direction other than westwards 
through either of the gaps in the central 
reservation of the length of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 3. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any motor vehicle to be driven at a 
speed exceeding 50 miles per hour on the length of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 4. 
6. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any motor vehicle to be driven at a 
speed exceeding 40 miles per hour on the lengths of 
the trunk road specified in Schedule 5. 
7. No person may, during the works period, drive, 
cause or permit any motor vehicle to be driven at a 
speed exceeding 30 miles per hour on the lengths of 
the trunk road specified in Schedule 6. 
8. No person may, during the works period, cause or 
permit any vehicle with a width of or exceeding 3.2 
metres or 3.7 metres to proceed on the lengths of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 7. 
9. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, to be driven on the lengths of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 5. 
10. No person may, during the works period, ride or 
cause to be ridden, any pedal cycle on the length of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 8. 
11. No pedestrian may, during the works period, 
proceed on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 8. 
Suspensions 
12. The provisions of The Trunk Road (A55) 
(Penmaenbach - Dwygyfylchi, Gwynedd) (One-Way 
Traffic) Order 1990(2) are suspended insofar as they 
relate to the offside lane of the westbound carriageway 
of the length of the trunk road specified in Schedule 1 
during such times as the eastbound carriageway is 
closed in accordance with article 3 and to the offside 
lane of the eastbound carriageway of the length of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 1 during such times as 
the westbound carriageway is closed in accordance 
with that article. 
13. The provisions of The A55 Trunk Road 
(Penmaenbach Tunnel, Gwynedd) (Closure of Central 
                                                                               
(2) 
S.I. 1990/328 
 
4
Reservation Crossings) Order 1994(3) are suspended 
during such times as the prohibition specified in article 
3 is in operation. 
14. Any 
statutory 
provisions 
restricting 
or 
derestricting the speed of vehicles on the relevant 
lengths of the trunk road specified in Schedules 4, 5 
and 6 are suspended during such times as the 
restrictions specified in articles 5, 6 and 7 are in 
operation. 
Application 
15.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 apply only at such times 
and to such extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limit imposed by this Order applies to 
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
16. The maximum duration of this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
 
 
Dated the                                            6 April 2018 
 
 
 
Nina Ley 
Head of Business Unit, Network Management 
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULES 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
Contraflow 
 
The length of the trunk road that extends from a point 
320 metres west of the western portal of the 
Penmaenbach Westbound Tunnel to a point 130 metres 
east of the eastern portal of that tunnel. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
 No overtaking restriction 
 
The length of the eastbound (headland) carriageway of 
the trunk road that extends from a point 320 metres 
west of the western portal of the Penmaenbach 
                                                                               
(3) 
S.I. 1994/3088 
 
5
Westbound Tunnel to a point 130 metres east of the 
eastern portal of that tunnel. 
 
SCHEDULE 3 
Limits of the central reserve gaps 
 
The gap in the central reservation situated between a 
point 130 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Penmaenbach Westbound Tunnel and a point 65 
metres east of that portal. 
 
The gap in the central reservation situated between a 
point 210 metres west of the western portal of the 
Penmaenbach Westbound Tunnel and a point 320 
metres west of that portal. 
 
SCHEDULE 4 
Temporary 50 mph speed limit 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 20 metres east of the 
eastern portal of the Conwy Tunnel to a point 20 
metres west of the centre-point of Morfa Drive over-
bridge. 
 
SCHEDULE 5 
Temporary 40 mph speed limit & prohibition of 
vehicles 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 500 metres east of the 
centre-point of the Junction 19 (Glan Conwy 
Interchange) roundabout to the centre-point of Red 
Gables Viaduct over-bridge, including the westbound 
on and off slip roads at Junctions 19, 18, 17, the 
roundabout at Junction 16 and the central reserve gap 
as defined in paragraph 2 of Schedule 3. 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the centre-point of Red Gables 
Viaduct over-bridge to the central reserve at a point 
191 metres west of the western portal of Penmaenbach 
Eastbound Headland Tunnel, including the central 
reserve gap as defined in paragraph 2 of Schedule 3. 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the central reservation at a point 
787 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Penmaenbach Eastbound Headland Tunnel to a point 
500 metres east of the centre-point of the Junction 19 
(Glan Conwy Interchange) roundabout, including the 
eastbound on and off slip roads at Junctions 17, 18 and 
19. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
SCHEDULE 6 
Extension of the Headland 30mph Speed 
Restriction 
 
The length of the central reserve gap between a point 
130 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Penmaenbach Westbound Tunnel and a point 65 
metres east of that portal. 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 840 metres west of the 
centre-point of the Junction 17 (Conwy Morfa) over-
bridge to a point 362 metres west of the western portal 
of the Penmaenbach Westbound Tunnel. 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 940 metres east of the 
centre-point of Junction 16 (Puffin Roundabout) to a 
point 191 metres west of the western portal of 
Penmaenbach Eastbound Headland Tunnel. 
 
The gap in the central reservation between a point 210 
metres west of the western portal of the Penmaenbach 
Westbound Tunnel and a point 320 metres west of that 
portal. 
 
SCHEDULE 7 
Vehicle width restriction 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 30 metres east of the 
centre-point of Junction 16 (Puffin Roundabout) to the 
nosing of the eastbound on slip road at Junction 18 
(Llandudno Junction Interchange). 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the westbound off 
slip road at Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction 
Interchange) to a point 30 metres east of the centre-
point of Junction 16 (Puffin Roundabout), including 
the westbound on slip road at Junction 18. 
 
SCHEDULE 8 
Temporary prohibition of cyclists and pedestrians 
 
The length of the cycleway/footpath that extends from 
a point 787 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Penmaenbach Eastbound Headland Tunnel, including 
the length of cycleway/footpath adjacent to the 
Junction 17 eastbound exit slip road, to its abutment 
with the A457 at the end of that slip road. 
