STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 1023
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Cannock Chase (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
19th September 2023
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2), (3) and (4)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated May 2023(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of Cannock Chase. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/cannock-chase.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Cannock Chase (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2024.
(4) Article 5 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of parish councillors, on 15th October 2026;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of parish councillors in England in 2027.
(5) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Cannock Chase (Electoral Changes) Order 2023”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/cannock-chase.Wards of the district of Cannock Chase and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Cannock Chase are abolished.
(2) The district of Cannock Chase is divided into the 12 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is three.Elections of the district of Cannock Chase
4.—(1) Elections of all councillors for each ward of the district of Cannock Chase are to be held simultaneously on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024.
(2) The councillors holding office for any ward abolished by article 3(1) immediately before the fourth day after the ordinary election of councillors in 2024 are to retire on that fourth day, and the newly elected councillors are to come into office on that fourth day.
(3) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2024—
(a)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2026;
(b)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2027;
(c)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2028.
(4) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2024—
(a)
the first councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the smallest number of votes; and
(b)
the second councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the next smallest number of votes.
(5) In the case of an equality of votes between any persons elected which makes it uncertain which of them is to retire in any year, the person to retire in that year is to be determined by lot.
(6) If an election of councillors for any ward is not contested, the person to retire in each year is to be determined by lot.
(7) An election to replace a councillor who is to retire under paragraph (3) is to be held on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in the year in which the retirement is due to take place, and any newly elected councillor is to come into office on the fourth day after that day.
(8) Where under this article any question is to be determined by lot, the lot is to be drawn at the next practicable meeting of the council after the question has arisen and the drawing is to be conducted under the direction of the person presiding at the meeting.Parish wards of the parishes of Brereton & Ravenhill, Heath Hayes & Wimblebury, Hednesford and Rugeley and number of councillors
5.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Brereton & Ravenhill, Heath Hayes & Wimblebury, Hednesford and Rugeley are abolished.
(2) The parish of Brereton & Ravenhill is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Heath Hayes & Wimblebury is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Hednesford is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Rugeley is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of Table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(7) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
19th September 2023Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of Cannock Chase
Name of ward
Brereton & Ravenhill
Chadsmoor
Cannock Longford & Bridgtown
Cannock Park & Old Fallow
Etching Hill & the Heath
Hawks Green with Rumer Hill
Heath Hayes & Wimblebury
Hednesford Green Heath
Hednesford Hills & Rawnsley
Hednesford Pye Green
Norton Canes
Western SpringsArticle 5
SCHEDULE 2
Parish wards of the parishes of Brereton & Ravenhill, Heath Hayes & Wimblebury, Hednesford and Rugeley and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Brereton & Ravenhill and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Brereton & Ravenhill 10
Power Station 3
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Heath Hayes & Wimblebury and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Gorsemoor 1
Hawks Green 6
Wimblebury 6
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of Hednesford and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Green Heath 4
Hawks Green 1
Hednesford Hills 1
Keys Park 1
Pye Green 3
Table 4
Parish wards of the parish of Rugeley and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Etchinghill 10
Pear Tree 2
Western Springs North 3
Western Springs South & Hagley West 4EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Cannock Chase following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Cannock Chase and replaces them with 12 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes provisions for a whole district council election in 2024. Subsequently, the council will revert to the existing system of election by thirds. That article also provides for the order of retirement of councillors in 2026, 2027 and 2028 and the election of their replacements.
Article 5 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward and parish ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/cannock-chase.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.