Draft Order laid before the Scottish Parliament under section 18(4) of the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003, for approval by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
DRAFT SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No.  
PUBLIC BODIES
The Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Non-executive Directors of the Scottish National Investment Bank p.l.c. as Specified Authorities) Order 2020
Made
2020
Coming into force in accordance with article 1
The Scottish Ministers make the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3(3) of the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003(1) and all other powers enabling them to do so.
In accordance with section 18(4) of that Act(2), a draft of this Order has been laid before and approved by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
(1)
2003 asp 4.
(2)
Section 18(4) was modified by paragraph 5 of schedule 3 of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (asp 10).Citation and commencement
1.  This Order may be cited as the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Non-executive Directors of the Scottish National Investment Bank p.l.c. as Specified Authorities) Order 2020 and comes into force on the day after the day on which it is made.Treatment of non-executive directors of the Scottish National Investment Bank p.l.c. as specified authorities
2.  Non-executive directors of the Scottish National Investment Bank p.l.c. are to be treated, for the purposes of or in connection with any appointment to those offices, as if they were one of the specified authorities within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (the Commissioner’s functions).Name
A member of the Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House,
Edinburgh
DateEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order provides that non-executive directors of the Scottish National Investment Bank p.l.c. are to be treated, for the purposes of or in connection with any appointment to those offices, as if they were one of the specified authorities within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003.