Draft Order in Council laid before the Scottish Parliament under paragraph 3(9) of schedule 1 of the Scotland Act 1998 for approval by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
DRAFT SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No.
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
The Scottish Parliament (Constituencies and Regions) Order 2020
Made
2020
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
At the Court at Buckingham Palace, the day of
Present,
The Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council
This Order is made in exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 6(5)of schedule 1 to the Scotland Act 1998(1) and all other powers enabling Her Majesty to do so.
In accordance with paragraph 3(9) of that schedule a draft of this instrument has been laid before and approved by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
Accordingly, Her Majesty is pleased, by and with the advice of Her Privy Council, to order as follows:
(1)
1998 c.46. Schedule 1 was substituted by section 1 and paragraph 1 of schedule 1 of the Scottish Parliament (Constituencies) Act 2004 (c.13). Paragraph 3 of schedule 1 was amended by section 8 of the Scotland Act 2016 (c.11) and section 18(1)(b) of the Islands (Scotland) Act 2018 (asp 12).Citation, commencement and interpretation
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Scottish Parliament (Constituencies and Regions) Order 2020.
(2) Except for article 4, this Order comes into force on the day after the day on which it is made(1).
(3) Article 4 comes into force on the dissolution of the Parliament.
(4) In this Order “the Act” means the Scotland Act 1998.
(1)
By virtue of paragraph 6(7) of schedule 1 of the Scotland Act 1998 the coming into force of this Order does not affect the return of any member to the Scottish Parliament or its constitution until the Scottish Parliament is dissolved.Constituencies
2.—(1) For the purposes of paragraph 1(2)(c) of schedule 1 of the Act, the constituencies provided for are those which—
(a)
are named in column 1 of the table in schedule 1 of this Order, and
(b)
comprise the areas described for each such constituency in the deposited data.
(2) In paragraph (1)(b) the “deposited data” means the data recorded on the USB memory stick—
(a)
entitled “Interim Review of Scottish Parliament Boundaries at Cardowan by Stepps”,
(b)
submitted to the Scottish Ministers on 5 August 2020, and
(c)
deposited with the Scottish Ministers at their offices at St Andrews House, Edinburgh EH1 3DG.
(3) The constituencies are designated as being either county constituencies or burgh constituencies according to the entry in column 2 of schedule 1 opposite each constituency name.Regions
3.  For the purposes of paragraph 2(2) of schedule 1 of the Act, the regions provided for are those which—
(a)
are named in column 1 of the table in schedule 2 of this Order, and
(b)
comprise the combined areas of the constituencies mentioned in column 2 of that table opposite the name of each region.Revocation
4.  The Scottish Parliament (Constituencies and Regions) Order 2014(1) is revoked.
(1)
S.I. 2014/501.Name
Clerk of the Privy CouncilArticle 2
SCHEDULE 1
Scottish Parliament Constituencies
(other than Na h-Eileanan an Iar, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands Constituencies)
Column 1 Column 2
Constituency Name Designation
Aberdeen Central Burgh
Aberdeen Donside Burgh
Aberdeen South and North Kincardine County
Aberdeenshire East County
Aberdeenshire West County
Airdrie and Shotts Burgh
Almond Valley County
Angus North and Mearns County
Angus South County
Argyll and Bute County
Ayr Burgh
Banffshire and Buchan Coast County
Caithness, Sutherland and Ross County
Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley County
Clackmannanshire and Dunblane County
Clydebank and Milngavie County
Clydesdale County
Coatbridge and Chryston Burgh
Cowdenbeath County
Cumbernauld and Kilsyth County
Cunninghame North County
Cunninghame South County
Dumbarton County
Dumfriesshire County
Dundee City East Burgh
Dundee City West Burgh
Dunfermline County
East Kilbride Burgh
East Lothian County
Eastwood County
Edinburgh Central Burgh
Edinburgh Eastern Burgh
Edinburgh Northern and Leith Burgh
Edinburgh Pentlands Burgh
Edinburgh Southern Burgh
Edinburgh Western Burgh
Ettrick, Roxburgh and Berwickshire County
Falkirk East County
Falkirk West County
Galloway and West Dumfries County
Glasgow Anniesland Burgh
Glasgow Cathcart Burgh
Glasgow Kelvin Burgh
Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn Burgh
Glasgow Pollok Burgh
Glasgow Provan Burgh
Glasgow Shettleston Burgh
Glasgow Southside Burgh
Greenock and Inverclyde County
Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse Burgh
Inverness and Nairn County
Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley County
Kirkcaldy County
Linlithgow County
Mid Fife and Glenrothes County
Midlothian North and Musselburgh County
Midlothian South, Tweeddale and Lauderdale County
Moray County
Motherwell and Wishaw Burgh
North East Fife County
Paisley Burgh
Perthshire North County
Perthshire South and Kinross-shire County
Renfrewshire North and West County
Renfrewshire South County
Rutherglen Burgh
Skye, Lochaber and Badenoch County
Stirling County
Strathkelvin and Bearsden County
Uddingston and Bellshill BurghArticle 3
SCHEDULE 2
Scottish Parliament Regions
Column 1 Column 2
Region Constituency Name
Central Scotland Airdrie and Shotts
Coatbridge and Chryston
Cumbernauld and Kilsyth
East Kilbride
Falkirk East
Falkirk West
Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse
Motherwell and Wishaw
Uddingston and Bellshill
Glasgow Glasgow Anniesland
Glasgow Cathcart
Glasgow Kelvin
Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn
Glasgow Pollok
Glasgow Provan
Glasgow Shettleston
Glasgow Southside
Rutherglen
Highlands and Islands Argyll and Bute
Caithness, Sutherland and Ross
Na h-Eileanan an Iar
Inverness and Nairn
Moray
Orkney Islands
Shetland Islands
Skye, Lochaber and Badenoch
Lothian Almond Valley
Edinburgh Central
Edinburgh Eastern
Edinburgh Northern and Leith
Edinburgh Pentlands
Edinburgh Southern
Edinburgh Western
Linlithgow
Midlothian North and Musselburgh
Mid Scotland and Fife Clackmannanshire and Dunblane
Cowdenbeath
Dunfermline
Kirkcaldy
Mid Fife and Glenrothes
North East Fife
Perthshire North
Perthshire South and Kinross-shire
Stirling
North East Scotland Aberdeen Central
Aberdeen Donside
Aberdeen South and North Kincardine
Aberdeenshire East
Aberdeenshire West
Angus North and Mearns
Angus South
Banffshire and Buchan Coast
Dundee City East
Dundee City West
South Scotland Ayr
Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley
Clydesdale
Dumfriesshire
East Lothian
Ettrick, Roxburgh and Berwickshire
Galloway and West Dumfries
Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley
Midlothian South, Tweeddale and Lauderdale
West Scotland Clydebank and Milngavie
Cunninghame North
Cunninghame South
Dumbarton
Eastwood
Greenock and Inverclyde
Paisley
Renfrewshire North and West
Renfrewshire South
Strathkelvin and BearsdenEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order gives effect to the recommendations contained in the Report on Interim Review of Scottish Parliament Boundaries at Cardowan by Stepps by the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland dated March 2020. The report is available on the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland’s website (www.lgbc-scotland.gov.uk) and hard copies can also be requested (tel: 0131 244 2001, email: lgbcs@scottishboundaries.gov.uk).
The report recommends changes to the constituency and region boundary at Cardowan by Stepps, between Glasgow Provan constituency and Coatbridge and Chryston constituency and between Glasgow region and Central Scotland region as set out by the Scottish Parliament (Constituencies and Regions) Order 2014 (S.I. 2014/501). An indicative map of the changes being made to these constituencies and regions is included in this note.
The Order defines the name, status and area of 70 of the 73 Scottish Parliament constituencies and the name and area of each Scottish Parliament region. (The Na h-Eileanan an Iar, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands constituencies are not included in the Order because schedule 1 to the Scotland Act 1998 (“the 1998 Act”), as amended by the Islands (Scotland) Act 2018, provides for them directly). Other than the changes made to the Glasgow Provan constituency and the Coatbridge and Chryston constituency and between Glasgow region and Central Scotland region, the constituencies and regions are the same as provided by the Scottish Parliament (Constituencies and Regions) Order 2014.
The Order comes into force on the day after it is made (with the exception of article 4). It does not affect the return of any member to the Scottish Parliament or its constitution until the Parliament is dissolved (paragraph 6(7) of schedule 1 to the 1998 Act).
The 70 constituencies are named and defined by article 2 read together with schedule 1. The area of each constituency is described in geographical information system data stored on a USB memory stick deposited with the Scottish Ministers. The USB memory stick is entitled “Interim Review of Scottish Parliament Boundaries at Cardowan by Stepps” and sets out the area of each constituency, taking into account the changes recommended by the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland. Maps of the boundaries are available on the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland’s website and hard copies can be requested by writing to the Commission.
Each constituency is (by article 2(3) and schedule 1) given the status of a burgh constituency or a county constituency. That status is relevant to the application of rules governing the conduct of elections to the Scottish Parliament (provided for under section 12 of the 1998 Act).
The regions are named and defined by article 3 read together with schedule 2.
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on business or the private or voluntary sector is foreseen.
  