 
 
W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 885 (W. 174) 
EDUCATION, WALES 
The Diocese of St Davids 
(Educational Endowments) (St 
Clears Church in Wales School) 
(Wales) Order 2018 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints St Davids Diocesan Trust as 
trustee of the endowment of the educational foundation 
known as the St Clears School Foundation (formerly 
known as St Clears National School) and makes new 
provision as to the use of that endowment. It creates 
two separate trusts, called the School Fund and the 
Religious 
Education 
Fund, 
and 
divides 
the 
Foundation’s assets between them.  
The School Fund is established under the uniform 
statutory trusts as set out in the Schedule for the 
benefit of the Church in Wales voluntary and 
foundation schools in the Diocese.   
The Religious Education Fund is established for the 
purpose of providing religious education in accordance 
with the doctrines of the Church in Wales within the 
parish in which the school was situated. 
The Order also extinguishes the rights to which any 
person has become entitled, under any trust which has 
arisen by virtue of section 1 of the Reverter of Sites 
Act 1987, in respect of the endowment.  
 
 
 
 
2
W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 885 (W. 174) 
EDUCATION, WALES 
The Diocese of St Davids 
(Educational Endowments) (St 
Clears Church in Wales School) 
(Wales) Order 2018 
Made 
  
 
18 July 2018 
Coming into force 
 31 July 2018 
The Endowment has been shown to the satisfaction of 
the Welsh Ministers to be or to have been used in 
connection with the provision of religious education in 
accordance with the tenets of the Church in Wales at a 
voluntary school within the meaning of section 32 of 
the Education Act 1996(1), the premises of which have 
ceased to be used for the purposes of a school, and that 
the requirements of section 554(3) of the Education 
Act 1996 are fulfilled. 
Application for an Order making new provision for the 
use of the Endowment has been made to the Welsh 
Ministers by the St Davids Diocesan Trust, which 
body appears to the Welsh Ministers to be the 
appropriate authority of the Church in Wales for that 
purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of 
persons interested to make representations has been 
given in accordance with the provisions of section 555 
of the Education Act 1996. 
No representations have been made on the proposed 
Order. 
The Foundation assets consist of £73,500.00, being the 
net proceeds of sale of the premises of the former 
                                                                               
(1) 
1996 c. 56. This section has since been repealed by 
paragraph 69 of Schedule 30 and Schedule 31 to the School 
Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
 
 
3
school and school house comprised in the Founding 
deeds and also any income derived from those assets 
before the coming into force of this Order. 
By virtue of section 1 of the Reverter of Sites Act 1987 
(“the 1987 Act”) a trust has or may have arisen in 
relation to the site of the above school and school 
house comprised in the Founding deeds. The Welsh 
Ministers are satisfied that all reasonably practicable 
steps to trace any person who is, or who may become, 
entitled as a beneficiary under that trust have been 
taken and that there is no claim by any such person 
which comes within the provisions of section 5(2)(a) 
of the 1987 Act. 
The Welsh Ministers in exercise of the powers 
conferred on the Secretary of State by sections 554 and 
556 of the Education Act 1996 and section 5 of the 
Reverter of Sites Act 1987(1), and now vested in them 
make the following Order(2): 
Title, commencement and application 
1.—(1) The title of this Order is the Diocese of St 
Davids (Educational Endowments) (St Clears Church 
in Wales School) (Wales) Order 2018 and it comes 
into force on 31 July 2018. 
(2) This Order applies in relation to Wales. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order unless the context otherwise 
requires— 
“the Diocese” (“yr Esgobaeth”) means the Diocese 
of St Davids and “the Diocesan Trust” (“yr 
Ymddiriedolaeth Esgobaethol”) is to be construed 
accordingly; 
“the Endowment” (“y Gwaddol”) means the 
endowment comprised in the Founding deeds;  
                                                                               
(1) 
1987 c. 15. 
(2) 
1996 c. 56. Section 554(1) was substituted by paragraph 
168(2) of Schedule 30 to the School Standards and 
Framework Act 1998 (c. 15). Section 554(3)(a) was 
substituted by paragraph 168(3) of Schedule 30 to the School 
Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 554(3)(b) was 
amended by paragraph 168(3)(b) of Schedule 30 to the 
School Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 
556(2)(a)  was amended by paragraph 169(a) of Schedule 30 
to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 
556(2)(b) was amended by paragraph 169(b) of Schedule 30 
to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998. The 
functions of the Secretary of State under sections 554 and 
556 of the Education Act 1996 were transferred to the 
National Assembly for Wales by the National Assembly for 
Wales (Transfer of Functions) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/672) 
and then to the Welsh Ministers by paragraph 30 of Schedule 
11 to the Government of Wales Act 2006 (c. 32). 
 
 
4
“the Foundation” (“y Sefydliad”) means the 
educational foundation known as the St Clears 
School Foundation established by the Founding 
deeds; 
“the Foundation assets” (“asedau’r Sefydliad”) 
means the assets currently representing the 
Endowment; 
“foundation school” (“ysgol sefydledig”) has the 
same meaning as in the School Standards and 
Framework Act 1998(1); 
“the Founding deeds” (“y gweithredoedd Sefydlu”) 
means the deeds made on— 
(i) 20 
December 
1905 
between 
the 
Reverend David Pugh of the one part and 
the Right Reverend Father in God John 
Owen Lord Bishop of St Davids, the 
Venerable Owen Evans Archdeacon of 
Carmarthen, 
the 
Reverend 
Charles 
Frederick Owen, the Reverend John 
Thomas Rural Dean of St Davids and Mr 
Lewis Pritchard Jones of the other part; 
and 
(ii) 20 September 1940 between Martha 
John, Ester John and Agnes John of the 
one part and the St Davids Diocesan 
Board of Finance of the other part; 
“the Religious Education Fund” (“y Gronfa 
Addysg Grefyddol”) means the religious education 
fund established by article 5(b); 
“the School Fund” (“y Gronfa Ysgolion”) means 
the school fund established by article  5(a); and 
“voluntary school” (“ysgol wirfoddol”) has the 
same meaning as in the School Standards and 
Framework Act 1998.  
Extinguishment of rights under a Reverter of Sites 
Act Trust 
3. The rights of any person who is or may become 
entitled as a beneficiary under the trust which has or 
may have arisen by virtue of section 1 of the Reverter 
of Sites Act 1987 in respect of the land comprised in 
the Endowment are extinguished by this Order. 
Trustee and vesting 
4.—(1) This Order appoints the Diocesan Trust to be 
Trustee of— 
(a) the Foundation, 
(b) the Foundation assets,  
(c) the School Fund, and 
                                                                               
(1) 
1998 c. 31. 
 
 
5
(d) the Religious Education Fund. 
(2) All funds which immediately before the date of 
this Order belong to or are held in trust for the 
Foundation, (other than any funds already held by the 
Diocesan Trust) are to be transferred to the Diocesan 
Trust, and all acts necessary for that purpose are to be 
done by any person holding such funds. 
Division of Assets 
5. The  Foundation assets are to be divided into two 
separate trust funds namely— 
(a) the School Fund comprising 11/14ths of the 
Foundation assets; and 
(b) the Religious Education Fund comprising 
3/14ths of the Foundation assets. 
Administration of Foundation 
6.—(1) After 
payment 
of 
any 
expenses 
of 
administration, the Diocesan Trust must account for 
that proportion of the capital and income of the 
Foundation assets which represents the Religious 
Education Fund to the Vicar, or Rector, and 
Churchwardens of the parish for which the Foundation 
was established to provide religious education.  
(2) Each Vicar, or Rector, and Churchwardens to 
whom payment is made in accordance with the 
provisions of the preceding paragraph are to be 
constituted as trustees of the Religious Education Fund 
and may retain the capital of the Fund and may apply 
the accruing income thereof, or may apply the capital 
thereof, towards educational purposes related to the 
said parish in connection with the provision of 
religious education in accordance with the tenets of the 
Church in Wales by means of a Sunday School or 
otherwise. 
(3) The Diocesan Trust is to hold the School Fund 
on the uniform statutory trusts for the benefit of 
Church in Wales voluntary or foundation schools 
within the Diocese. 
(4) In 
this 
article 
“uniform 
statutory 
trusts” 
(“ymddiriedolaethau statudol unffurf”) means the 
trusts set out in the Schedule (being the uniform 
statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education 
Act 1996 as they apply in relation to the School Fund). 
Consolidation 
7. The School Fund may be consolidated with any 
existing endowment held for the purposes specified in 
the Schedule.  
 
 
 
 
 
6
Kirsty Williams 
Cabinet Secretary for Education, one of the Welsh 
Ministers 
 
18 July 2018 
 
 
7
SCHEDULE Article 6(4) 
 
 
1. The Diocesan Trust may, after payment of any 
expenses 
incurred 
in 
connection 
with 
the 
administration of the School Fund, apply the capital 
and income of that School Fund for any of the 
following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for,  or the 
erection,  improvement or enlargement of, the 
premises of any relevant school in the 
Diocese; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in 
the Diocese; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for,  or the 
erection,  improvement or enlargement of, the 
premises of a teacher’s house for use in 
connection with any relevant school in the 
Diocese; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for 
use in connection with any relevant school in 
the Diocese. 
2. The Diocesan Trust may also, after payment of 
any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the School Fund, apply the income of 
that Fund for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, 
guidance and resources  (including materials) 
in connection with any matter related to the 
management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the Diocese; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out 
of any inspection of any relevant school in the 
Diocese required by Part 1 of the Education 
Act 2005(1); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging 
staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the School 
Fund for either of the purposes referred 
to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), 
(ii) the application of capital or income of 
the School Fund for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 1. 
3. “Relevant school” (“ysgol berthnasol”) means a 
school of the type referred to in article 6(3). 
                                                                               
(1) 
2005 c. 18. 
