W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 595 (W. 112) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A470 Trunk Road (Church 
Street, High Street and Manod 
Road, Blaenau Ffestiniog, 
Gwynedd) (Prohibition and 
Restriction of Waiting) Order 2018 
Made 
8 May 2018 
Coming into force 
10 May 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A470 
Maentwrog to East of Conwy Trunk Road, in exercise 
of the powers conferred upon them by sections 1(1), 
2(1), 2(2), 4(2) and 124 of, and paragraph 27 of 
Schedule 9 to, the Road Traffic Regulation Act 
1984(1) and after consultation with the Chief Officer 
of the North Wales Police, make this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation  
1. The title of the Order is the A470 Trunk Road 
(Church Street, High Street and Manod Road, Blaenau 
Ffestiniog, Gwynedd) (Prohibition and Restriction of 
Waiting) Order 2018 and it comes into force on 10 
May 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order— 
“disabled person’s badge” (“bathodyn person 
anabl”) has the meaning given in regulation 2(1) 
of The Disabled Persons (Badges for Motor 
Vehicles) (Wales) Regulations 2000(2); 
                                                                               
(1) 
 1984 c.27; sections 1(1), 2(1) and (2) were amended by the 
New   Roads and Street Works Act 1991 (c.22), section 168 
and Schedule 8, paragraphs 17 and 18, section 1(1) was 
amended by paragraph 36(1) of Schedule 22 to the 
Environment Act 1995 (c.25). By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, 
and section 162 of, and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the 
Government of Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these powers are now 
exercisable by the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
(2) 
S.I. 2000/786 (W.123), amended by S.I. 2014/3082.  There 
are other amending instruments but none is relevant. 
 
2
“parking disc” (“disg parcio”) has the meaning 
given in regulation 8(5) of The Local Authorities’ 
Traffic Orders (Exemptions for Disabled Persons) 
(Wales) Regulations 2000(1); 
“the deposited plan” (“y plan a adneuwyd”) means 
the 3 plans entitled “The A470 Trunk Road 
(Church Street, High Street and Manod Road, 
Blaenau Ffestiniog, Gwynedd) (Prohibition and 
Restriction of Waiting) Order 2018” which 
accompanies this Order;  
“the relevant position” (“y safle perthnasol”) has 
the meaning given by regulation 4 of The Local 
Authorities' Traffic Orders (Exemptions for 
Disabled Persons) (Wales) Regulations 2000; and 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A470 
Maentwrog to East of Conwy Trunk Road at 
Blaenau Ffestiniog.  
Prohibition and Restriction of Waiting 
Prohibition of waiting at any time 
3. Except as provided in articles 7(1) and 7(2), no 
person may cause or permit any vehicle to wait on the 
sides of the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 1 to this Order. 
Waiting restricted to 45 minutes between 09:00 and 
18:00 hours Monday to Saturday with no return 
within one hour  
4. Except as provided in articles 7(1) and 7(2), no 
person may cause or permit any vehicle to wait on the 
sides of the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 2 to this Order for a period exceeding 45 
minutes between 09:00 hours and 18:00 hours on 
Monday to Saturday with no return within one hour. 
Waiting restricted to 15 minutes between 09:00 and 
18:00 hours Monday to Saturday with no return 
within one hour 
5. Except as provided in articles 7(1) and 7(2), no 
person may cause or permit any vehicle to wait on the 
sides of the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 3 to this Order for a period exceeding 15 
minutes between 09:00 hours and 18:00 hours on 
Monday to Saturday with no return within one hour. 
                                                                               
(1) 
S.I. 2000/1785 (W.122). 
 
3
Prohibition of waiting at any time (disabled badge 
holders parking only) 
6. Except as provided in articles 7(1) and 7(3), no 
person may cause or permit any vehicle, other than a 
vehicle displaying a disabled person’s badge, to wait 
on the trunk road specified in Schedule 4 to this Order.  
Exemptions 
7.—(1) Nothing in articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 renders it 
unlawful to cause or permit any vehicle to wait on the 
sides of the relevant lengths of the trunk road specified 
in the Schedules to this Order for so long as may be 
necessary to enable:- 
(a) a person to board or alight from a vehicle; 
(b) goods to be loaded on or unloaded from a                 
vehicle; 
(c) the vehicle to be used in connection with any     
of the following operations:  
(i) building, industrial or demolition 
(ii) operations; 
(iii) the removal of any obstruction to            
traffic; 
(iv) the 
maintenance, 
improvement 
or           
reconstruction of the said lengths of the 
trunk road; or 
(v) the laying, erection, alteration, or repair 
in, or in land adjacent to the said lengths 
of the trunk road of any sewer or of any 
main, pipe or apparatus for the supply of 
gas, water or electricity or any electronic 
communications apparatus as defined in 
paragraph 5 of Schedule 3A to the 
Communications Act 2003(1);  
(d) the vehicle to be used in the service of a   
local authority or a water authority in 
pursuance of statutory functions;  
(e) the vehicle to take petrol, oil, water or air 
from any garage situated on or adjacent to the 
said length of the trunk road;  
(f) the vehicle to be used for fire brigade,   
ambulance or police purposes;  
(g) the vehicle to stop when the person in control 
of  it: 
(i) is required by law to stop; 
(ii) is obliged to stop in order to avoid an        
accident;  
(iii) is prevented from proceeding; or   
                                                                               
(1) 
2003 (c.21) Schedule 3A was inserted by paragraph 1 of 
Schedule 1 to the Digital Economy Act 2017 (c. 30).     
 
4
(iv) is acting upon the direction, or with  the 
permission, of a police constable, police 
community support officer or civil 
enforcement officer. 
(2) Nothing in articles 3, 4 and 5 renders it unlawful 
to cause or permit a vehicle which displays in the 
relevant position a disabled person’s badge and a 
parking disc (on which the driver, or other person in 
charge of the vehicle, has marked the time at which the 
period of waiting began) to wait on the sides of the 
relevant lengths of the trunk road specified in the 
Schedules to this Order for a period not exceeding 3 
hours, being a period separated by an interval of at 
least 1 hour from a previous period of waiting by the 
same vehicle on the same day on the trunk road. 
(3) Nothing in article 6 renders it unlawful to cause 
or permit a disabled person’s vehicle which displays in 
the relevant position a disabled person’s badge to wait 
on the side of the relevant length of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 4 to this Order. 
Revocations 
8. The A470 Trunk Road (Church Street, High Street 
and Manod Road, Blaenau Ffestiniog, Gwynedd) 
(Prohibition and Restriction of Waiting) Order 2010(1) 
is hereby revoked.  
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers 
 
Dated   8 May 2018 
 
 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Asset Management Standards 
Welsh Government 
 
                                                                               
(1) 
S.I. 2010/2263. 
 
5
SCHEDULES 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
Prohibition of waiting at any time 
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street from the eastern end of the 
lay-by outside Bwlch y Gwynt, in an easterly 
direction, to the eastern boundary of the property 
known as number 9 Church Street and given the 
reference A on the deposited plan. 
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street and High Street from the 
boundary between the properties known as numbers 35 
and 36 Church Street, in an easterly direction, to a 
point on High Street 39 metres west of the centre point 
of its junction with the road known as Dolgarregddu 
and given the reference B on the deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from a point 21 metres west of 
the centre point of its junction with the road known as 
Dolgarregddu, in an easterly direction, to a point 10 
metres east of the centre point of its junction with 
Ynys Terrace and given the reference C on the 
deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from its junction with the 
unclassified road between the properties known as 
numbers 12 and 13 High Street, in an easterly 
direction, to the boundary between the properties 
known as numbers 34 and 35 High Street and given 
the reference D on the deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from its junction with Lord 
Street, in a westerly direction to a point 20 metres west 
of that junction and given the reference E on the 
deposited plan.   
That length of the eastern side of the trunk road known 
as High Street and Manod Road from its junction with 
Lord Street, in a generally southerly direction, to a 
point 54 metres south of the centre point of its junction 
with the road leading to Isfryn Terrace between the 
properties known as Bryn Eilian and Afallon and given 
the reference F on the deposited plan.  
That length of the eastern side of the trunk road known 
as Manod Road from a point 56 metres north of the 
centre point of its junction with the access road leading 
to Ysgol Manod, in a southerly direction, to the 
boundary between the properties known as numbers 70 
 
6
and 71 Manod Road and given the reference G on the 
deposited plan.  
That length of the eastern side of the trunk road known 
as Manod Road from a point 49 metres south of the 
centre point of its junction with the access road leading 
to Ysgol Manod, in a southerly direction, to a point 30 
metres south of the centre point of its junction with 
Cae Clyd Road and given the reference H on the 
deposited plan.  
That length of the eastern side of the trunk road known 
as Manod Road from a point 10 metres north of the 
centre point of the cross roads at Congl-Y-Wal, in a 
southerly direction, to a point approximately 10 metres 
south of the centre point of the cross roads at Congl-Y-
Wal and given the reference I on the deposited plan.  
That length of the southern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street from its junction with Bwlch y 
Gwynt Roundabout in an easterly direction to its 
junction with Market Place and given the reference J 
on the deposited plan.  
That length of the southern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street and High Street from its 
junction with Market Place, in an easterly direction, to 
the end of the west side taper of the lay-by outside the 
properties known as numbers 3 to 5 High Street 33 
metres east of the centre point of the access to the 
railway station car park and given the reference K on 
the deposited plan.  
That length of the southern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from the end of the east side 
taper of the lay-by outside the properties known as 
numbers 3 to 5 High Street, 16 metres west of the 
centre point of its junction with New Road, in an 
easterly direction, to a point 20 metres east of the 
centre point of its junction with Cwm Bowydd Road 
and given the reference L on the deposited plan.  
That length of the south western side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from a point 77 metres south of 
the centre point of its junction with Cwm Bowydd 
Road, in a south easterly direction, for a distance of 20 
metres and given the reference L1 on the deposited 
plan.  
That length of the south western side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from a point 144 metres south of 
the centre point of its junction with Cwm Bowydd 
Road, in a south easterly direction, for a distance of 20 
metres and given the reference L2 on the deposited 
plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as High Street and Manod Road from a point 
69 metres north of the centre point of its junction with 
the northern Pen y Gelli Terrace, in a generally 
 
7
southerly direction, to a point 17 metres south of the 
centre point of its junction with the northern road 
leading to Maes y Plas and Penygwndwn and given the 
reference M on the deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from a point 40 metres north of 
the centre point of its junction with the southern road 
leading to Penygwndwn, between the properties 
known as numbers 34 and 35 Manod Road, in a 
southerly direction, to a point 11 metres south of the 
centre point of its junction with the southern road 
leading to Penygwndwn and given the reference N on 
the deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from a point 56 metres north of 
the centre point of its junction with the southern access 
leading to Ysgol Manod, in a southerly direction, to a 
point 3 metres to the southern side of its junction with 
the unclassified access between the properties known 
as numbers 88 and 89 Manod Road and given the 
reference O on the deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from the northern side of the 
minor access road alongside number 94 Manod Road, 
in a southerly direction, to a point 15 metres south of 
the centre point of its junction with the unclassified 
road known as Tyddyn Gwyn and given the reference 
P on the deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from a point 6 metres north of 
the access between the properties known as numbers 
148 and 149 Manod Road, in a southerly direction, to a 
point 6 metres south of the access between the 
properties known as numbers 148 and 149 Manod 
Road and given the reference Q on the deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from a point 20 metres north of 
the centre point of its junction with the link road 
between Manod Road and the A496, in a southerly 
direction, to a point 35 metres south of the centre point 
of its junction with the link road between Manod Road 
and the A496 and given the reference R on the 
deposited plan.  
That length of the western side of the trunk road 
known as Manod Road from a point 10 metres north of 
the centre point of the crossroads at Congl-Y-Wal, in a 
southerly direction, to a point 10 metres south of the 
centre point of the crossroads at Congl-Y-Wal and 
given the reference S on the deposited plan. 
 
8
 
SCHEDULE 2 
Waiting restricted to 45 minutes between 
09:00 and 18:00 hours Monday to 
Saturday and no return within one hour 
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street from the eastern boundary of 
the property known as number 9 Church Street, in an 
easterly direction for a distance of 61 metres and given 
the reference T1 on the deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as Church Street from the boundary between 
the properties known as numbers 35 and 36 Church 
Street, in a westerly direction for a distance of 49 
metres and given the reference T2 on the deposited 
plan.  
That length of lay-by on the northern side of the trunk 
road known as Church Street and High Street from a 
point 39 metres west of the centre point of its junction 
with the road known as Dolgarregddu, in an easterly 
direction, to a point 21 metres west of the centre point 
of its junction with the road known as Dolgarregddu 
and given the reference U on the deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from a point 10 metres east of 
the centre point of its junction with Ynys Terrace, in 
an easterly direction, to its junction with the 
unclassified road between the properties known as 
numbers 12 and 13 High Street and given the reference 
V on the deposited plan.  
That length of the northern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from the boundary between the 
properties known as numbers 34 and 35 High Street, in 
an easterly direction, to a point 20 metres west of the 
centre point of its junction with Lord Street and given 
the reference W on the deposited plan.  
 
SCHEDULE 3 
Waiting restricted to 15 minutes between 
09:00 and 18:00 hours Monday to 
Saturday and no return within one hour 
That length of the southern side of the trunk road 
known as High Street from the end of the east side 
taper of the lay-by outside numbers 3 to 5 High Street, 
18 metres west of the centre point of the side road 
junction to New Road, in a westerly direction, for a 
distance of 18 metres and given the reference X on the 
deposited plan.  
 
9
 
SCHEDULE 4 
Prohibition of waiting at any time (blue 
badge parking only) 
That length of the southern side of the length of the 
trunk road known as High Street from the end of the 
west side taper of the lay-by outside the properties 
known as numbers 3 to 5 High Street, 33 metres east 
of the centre point of the access to the railway station 
car park, in an easterly direction, for a distance of 13 
metres and given the reference Y on the deposited 
plan. 
 
