W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 596 (W. 113) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A465 Trunk Road (Ebbw Vale 
West Junction, Blaenau Gwent to 
Hardwick Roundabout, 
Monmouthshire) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions and 
Restrictions) Order 2018 
Made 
1 May 2018 
Coming into force 
7 May 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, being the traffic authority for the 
A465 Neath to Abergavenny Trunk Road, are satisfied 
that traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road 
should be prohibited and restricted because of works 
proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1) and (4) 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this 
Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation 
1. The title of this Order is the A465 Trunk Road 
(Ebbw Vale West Junction, Blaenau Gwent to 
Hardwick Roundabout, Monmouthshire) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions and Restrictions) Order 2018 and 
it comes into force on 7 May 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; and 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c.27; Section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006, these powers are now exercisable by the 
Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or  
(ii) for the  purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd“) means the A465 
Neath to Abergavenny Trunk Road from Ebbw 
Vale West Junction in the County of Blaenau 
Gwent to Hardwick Roundabout in the County of 
Monmouthshire described in the Schedules to this 
Order;  
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means the 
period commencing at 00:01 hours on 7 November 
2016 and ending when the temporary traffic signs 
are permanently removed. 
(2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered article 
or Schedule is a reference to the article or Schedule 
bearing that number in this Order. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, to proceed on the lengths of the trunk road 
specified in Schedule 1. 
4. No person shall, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to make a right hand turn 
on the length of the trunk road specified in Schedule 2. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 50 miles per hour on the length of the trunk 
road specified in Schedule 3. 
6. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 40 miles per hour on the length of the trunk 
road specified in Schedule 4. 
7. No person may, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 10 miles per hour on the length of the trunk 
road specified in Schedule 4. 
 
3
8. No person may, during the works period, drive, or 
cause or permit any vehicle to overtake on the length 
of the trunk road specified in Schedule 4. 
9. No person may, during the works period, ride or 
cause to be ridden any pedal cycle on the lengths of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 5. 
Suspension 
10. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the relevant lengths of the trunk road 
specified in article 2 are suspended during such times 
as the restriction specified in article 6 and 7 is in 
operation. 
Application 
11.—(1) The provisions of articles 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 
and 10 apply only during such times and to such extent 
as the application of the prohibitions and restrictions 
referred to therein are indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply to 
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
12. The maximum duration for this Order will be 18 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers 
 
Dated the   1 May 2018 
 
 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Asset Management Standards 
Welsh Government 
 
 
4
SCHEDULES 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
PROHIBITION OF VEHICLES 
That length of the trunk road from a point 37 metres 
north of the centre of Brynmawr Roundabout to a point 
38 metres west of the centre of Glanbaiden 
Roundabout. 
That length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road from a point 38 metres east of the centre of 
Glanbaiden Roundabout to the start of the Llanfoist 
exit slip road. 
That length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road from a point 45 metres west of the centre point of 
Hardwick Roundabout to a point 38 metres east of the 
centre of Glanbaiden Roundabout. 
That length of the eastbound trunk road (new 
alignment lanes) from the centre of the Ebbw Vale 
West Junction off slip road to a point 37 metres north 
of the centre of the Brynmawr Roundabout. 
That length of the westbound trunk road (new 
alignment lanes) from a point 37 metres north of the 
centre of the Brynmawr Roundabout to the centre of 
the Ebbw Vale West Junction on slip road. 
The 
circulatory 
carriageway 
of 
Glanbaiden 
Roundabout from its A465 westbound exit arm to its 
A465 eastbound entry arm. 
The 
circulatory 
carriageway 
of 
Glanbaiden 
Roundabout from its A465 eastbound exit arm to its 
A465 westbound entry arm. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
NO RIGHT TURN 
No right turn from the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road at Gilwern Junction into Station Road. 
 
SCHEDULE 3 
50 MPH SPEED LIMIT 
That length of the trunk road from a point 800 metres 
north west of the centre of the Brynmawr Roundabout 
to the centre of the Ebbw Vale East Junction on slip 
road. 
 
5
 
SCHEDULE 4 
40 MPH SPEED LIMIT, 10 MPH 
SPEED LIMIT AND NO 
OVERTAKING 
That length of the trunk road from a point 37 metres 
north of the centre of the Brynmawr Roundabout to a 
point 800 metres north west of the centre of Brynmawr 
Roundabout.  
 
SCHEDULE 5 
PROHIBITION OF CYCLISTS 
That length of the trunk road (new alignment lanes) 
from the centre of the Ebbw Vale West Junction off 
slip to a point 37 metres north of the centre of the 
Brynmawr Roundabout. 
That length of the trunk road from a point 37 metres 
east of the centre of the Brynmawr Roundabout to the 
eastbound off slip road at Llanfoist Junction on the 
eastbound lanes and the westbound off slip road at 
Llanfoist Junction for the westbound lanes. 
 
