W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 671 (W. 128) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A5 Trunk Road (Antelope 
Roundabout, Gwynedd to Anglesey 
Arms Roundabout, Anglesey) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions and 
30 mph Speed Limit) Order 2018 
Made 
31 May 2018 
Coming into force 
3 June 2018 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A5 
London to Holyhead Trunk Road, are satisfied that all 
traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road should be 
prohibited and restricted by reason of a filming event 
being held on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 16A of the 
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation  
1. The title of this Order is the A5 Trunk Road 
(Antelope Roundabout, Gwynedd to Anglesey Arms 
Roundabout, 
Anglesey) 
(Temporary 
Traffic 
Prohibitions and 30 mph Speed Limit) Order 2018 and 
it comes into force on 3 June 2018. 
2.—(1) In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means:  
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; 
(b) any vehicle being used in connection with 
works to the road or lighting or traffic signs or 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c.27.  Section 16A was inserted by the Road Traffic 
Regulation (Special Events) Act 1994, section 1(1).  By 
virtue of S.I. 1999/672, article 2 and Schedule 1, and 
paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to the Government of Wales 
Act 2006 (c.27), these powers are now exercisable by the 
Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
emergency works  to  any  sewer  or to any 
main or apparatus for the supply of gas, water 
or electricity, or telecommunications in, or in 
any land adjacent to, a length of road 
concerned; 
(c) any vehicle used by an authorised Filming 
Event official in support of and for safety 
reasons of the Event 
(d) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of whose 
capabilities is the responsibility of the Director of 
Special Forces or which are for the time being subject 
to the operational command of that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the length of 
the A5 London to Holyhead trunk road.   
“closure period” (“y cyfnod cau”) means the period 
commencing at 03:00 hours on 3 June 2018 and ending 
when the temporary traffic signs are permanently 
removed.    
(2) Any reference in this Order to a numbered article 
is a reference to the article bearing that number in this 
Order. 
Prohibitions and Restriction 
3. No person shall, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle specified in article 2. (1) (i), (ii) and (iii), to 
proceed in the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 1 to this Order. 
4. No person shall, during the works period, ride or 
cause to be ridden any pedal cycle in the length of the 
trunk road specified in Schedule 1 to this Order. 
5. No pedestrian shall, during the works period, 
proceed in the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 1 to this Order. 
6. No person shall, during the works period, drive or 
cause or permit any vehicle to proceed at a speed 
exceeding 30 miles per hour in the length of the trunk 
road specified in Schedule 2 to this Order. 
 
3
Suspension 
7. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the relevant length of the trunk road are 
suspended during such times as the restriction 
specified in article 6 is in operation. 
Application 
8.—(1) The prohibitions and restriction in articles 3, 
4, 5 and 6 shall apply, only during such times and to 
such extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limit imposed by this Order applies to 
an exempted vehicle specified in article 2. (1) (i) and 
(iv).  
Duration of this Order 
9. The maximum duration of this Order shall be one 
month. 
 
Signed under authority of the Cabinet Secretary for 
Economy and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers 
 
Dated the 31 May 2018 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Asset Management Standards Welsh 
Government 
SCHEDULE 1 
Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles, 
Cyclists and Pedestrians 
The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with Antelope Roundabout in Gwynedd to its 
junction 
with 
Anglesey 
Arms 
Roundabout 
in 
Anglesey. 
SCHEDULE 2 
Temporary 30 mph Speed Limit 
The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with Antelope Roundabout to the location of 
the existing 30 mph terminal signs at the southern end 
of the Menai Suspension Bridge in Gwynedd 
