STATUTORY RULES OF NORTHERN IRELAND
2023 No. 197
FAIR EMPLOYMENT
The Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) (Amendment) Order (Northern Ireland) 2023
Made
29th November 2023
Coming into operation
1st January 2024
The Executive Office (1) makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by Articles 50 and 51 of the Fair Employment and Treatment (Northern Ireland) Order 1998(2) and now vested in it(3).
(1)
Formerly the Office of the First minister and deputy First Minister; see section 1(1) of the Departments Act (Northern Ireland) 2016 (2016 c.5 (N.I.).
(2)
S.I. 1998/3162 (N.I.21)
(3)
S.R. 1999 No. 481; Article 4(a) and Schedule 2, Part ICitation and commencement
1.  This Order may be cited as the Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) (Amendment) Order (Northern Ireland) 2023 and shall come into operation on 1st January 2024.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 1 in operation at 1.1.2024, see art. 1Amendment of the Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) Order (Northern Ireland) 2004
2.  For the Schedule to the Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) Order (Northern Ireland) 2004(1) substitute the Schedule set out in the Schedule to this Order.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 2 in operation at 1.1.2024, see art. 1
(1)
S.R. 2004 No. 494; to which the most recent amending Order is SR 2016 No. 269Revocation
3.  The Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) (Amendment) Order (Northern Ireland) 2016(1) is revoked.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 3 in operation at 1.1.2024, see art. 1
(1)
S.R. 2016 No.269Sealed with the Official Seal of the Executive Office on 29th of November 2023.
(L.S.)
Siobhan Broderick
A senior officer of the Executive OfficeArticle 2
SCHEDULE
Commencement Information
I1
Sch. in operation at 1.1.2024, see art. 1
Articles 3 and 4
“SCHEDULE
PART 1
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES FOR THE PURPOSES OF ARTICLES 52 TO 65 OF THE 1998 ORDER
Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute
Arts Council of Northern Ireland
Belfast Harbour Commissioners
Belfast Health and Social Care Trust
The Big Lottery Fund
Board of Trustees of the National Museums and Galleries of Northern Ireland
British Broadcasting Corporation
Charity Commission for Northern Ireland
Chief Electoral Officer for Northern Ireland
Chief Inspector of Criminal Justice in Northern Ireland
Citybus Limited
Coleraine Harbour Commissioners
Commission for Victims and Survivors for Northern Ireland
Commissioner for Children and Young People for Northern Ireland
Commissioner for Older People for Northern Ireland
Comptroller and Auditor General for Northern Ireland
Construction Industry Training Board
Council for Catholic Maintained Schools
Dalriada Water Limited
Any District Council
The Education Authority
Equality Commission for Northern Ireland
Foyle, Carlingford and Irish Lights Commission
General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland
General Teaching Council for Northern Ireland
The Governing Body of Belfast Metropolitan College
The Governing Body of North West Regional College
The Governing Body of Northern Regional College
The Governing Body of South Eastern Regional College
The Governing Body of South West College
The Governing Body of Southern Regional College
The Governing Body of Stranmillis University College, Belfast
Governors of the Armagh Observatory and Planetarium
Health and Social Care Regulation and Quality Improvement Authority
Information Commissioner’s Office
Invest Northern Ireland
Labour Relations Agency
Livestock and Meat Commission for Northern Ireland
Local Government Staff Commission for Northern Ireland
Londonderry Port and Harbour Commissioners
Middletown Centre for Autism Limited
The National Heritage Memorial Fund
NI Water Clear Limited
The North/South Language Body
Northern Health and Social Care Trust
Northern Ireland Ambulance Service Health and Social Care Trust
Northern Ireland Assembly Commission
Northern Ireland Blood Transfusion Service (Special Agency)
Northern Ireland Community Relations Council
Northern Ireland Council for the Curriculum, Examinations and Assessment
Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service Board
Northern Ireland Fishery Harbour Authority
Northern Ireland Guardian Ad Litem Agency
Northern Ireland Housing Executive
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission
Northern Ireland Judicial Appointments Commission
Northern Ireland Library Authority
Northern Ireland Local Government Officers’ Superannuation Committee
Northern Ireland Medical and Dental Training Agency
Northern Ireland Museums Council
Northern Ireland Policing Board
Northern Ireland Practice and Education Council for Nursing and Midwifery
Northern Ireland Public Services Ombudsman
Northern Ireland Railways Company Limited
Northern Ireland Screen Commission
Northern Ireland Social Care Council
Northern Ireland Tourist Board
Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company
Northern Ireland Water Alpha Limited
Northern Ireland Water Limited
Office of Communications
Patient and Client Council
The Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland
Police Rehabilitation and Retraining Trust
Probation Board for Northern Ireland
Regional Agency for Public Health and Social Well-being
Regional Business Services Organisation
Royal Mail Group Limited
South Eastern Health and Social Care Trust
Southern Health and Social Care Trust
The Special EU Programmes Body
Sports Council for Northern Ireland
State Pathologist’s Department
Strategic Investment Board Limited
Tourism Ireland Limited
The Trade and Business Development Body
Ulster Supported Employment Limited
Ulsterbus Limited
Victims and Survivors Service Limited
Warrenpoint Harbour Authority
Waterways Ireland
Western Health and Social Care Trust
Youth Council for Northern Ireland
PART II
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES FOR THE PURPOSES OF ARTICLES 62 TO 65 OF THE 1998 ORDER
The Secretary of State
Any Northern Ireland Department
Any Northern Ireland Minister
Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
The Lord Chancellor
The Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland
The Controller of His Majesty’s Stationery Office
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland
Director of Savings
Food Standards Agency
Health and Safety Executive for Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Authority for Utility Regulation”EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order amends the Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) Order (Northern Ireland) 2004 (“the 2004 Order”) which specifies a number of persons or bodies as public authorities for certain purposes under Part VII of the Fair Employment and Treatment (Northern Ireland) Order 1998 (“the 1998 Order”).
The Schedule to the 2004 Order lists in Part I the bodies who are public authorities for the purposes of Articles 52 to 65 of the 1998 Order and in Part II the bodies who are public authorities for the purposes of Articles 62 to 65 of the 1998 Order.
Article 2 of this Order substitutes a new Schedule to the 2004 Order.
The following bodies have been added to Part I of the Schedule:
Dalriada Water Limited
Information Commissioner’s Office
NI Water Clear Limited
Northern Ireland Water Alpha Limited
The following amendments have been made to Part I of the Schedule:
Commissioner for Older People in Northern Ireland
has been amended to:
Commissioner for Older People for Northern Ireland
CITB NI
has been amended to:
Construction Industry Training Board
Northern Ireland Blood Transfusion Service Agency
has been amended to:
Northern Ireland Blood Transfusion Service (Special Agency)
Royal Mail Group PLC
has been amended to:
Royal Mail Group Limited
The governing body of Belfast Metropolitan College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of Belfast Metropolitan College
The governing body of North West Regional College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of North West Regional College
The governing body of Northern Regional College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of Northern Regional College
The governing body of South Eastern Regional College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of South Eastern Regional College
The governing body of South West College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of South West College
The governing body of Southern Regional College
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of Southern Regional College
The governing body of Stranmillis University College, Belfast
has been amended to:
The Governing Body of Stranmillis University College, Belfast
The following amendments have been made to Part II of the Schedule:
Comptroller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
has been amended to:
Controller of His Majesty’s Stationery Office
Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
has been amended to:
Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
Department for National Savings
has been amended to:
Director of Savings
Food Standards Agency Northern Ireland
has been amended to:
Food Standards Agency
The following deletion has been made to Part I of the Schedule:
Regional Health and Social Care Board
Article 3 revokes the Fair Employment (Specification of Public Authorities) (Amendment) Order (Northern Ireland) 2016.