STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 1051
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Central Bedfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2021
Made
14th September 2021
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated January 2021 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for Central Bedfordshire Council. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation and commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Central Bedfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2021.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50) and section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Central Bedfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2021”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/eastern/bedfordshire/central-bedfordshire.Wards of Central Bedfordshire and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Central Bedfordshire are abolished.
(2) The district of Central Bedfordshire is divided into the 31 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Biggleswade, Dunstable, Eggington, Houghton Regis and Leighton-Linslade
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Biggleswade, Dunstable, Eggington, Houghton Regis and Leighton-Linslade are abolished.
(2) The parish of Biggleswade is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Dunstable is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Eggington is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Houghton Regis is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Leighton-Linslade is divided into the nine parish wards listed in the first column of table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(8) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
14th September 2021Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of wards and number of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ampthill 3
Arlesey & Fairfield 2
Aspley & Woburn 1
Barton-le-Clay & Silsoe 2
Biggleswade East 2
Biggleswade West 3
Caddington 2
Clifton, Henlow & Langford 3
Cranfield & Marston Moretaine 3
Dunstable Central 1
Dunstable East 2
Dunstable North 2
Dunstable South 1
Dunstable West 2
Eaton Bray 1
Flitwick 3
Heath & Reach 1
Houghton Conquest & Haynes 1
Houghton Regis East 3
Houghton Regis West 2
Leighton-Linslade North 3
Leighton-Linslade South 3
Leighton-Linslade West 3
Meppershall & Shillington 1
Northill 1
Potton 2
Sandy 3
Shefford 2
Stotfold 2
Toddington 2
Westoning, Flitton & Greenfield 1Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Biggleswade
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Holme 5
Ivel 4
Stratton 6
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Dunstable
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Central 2
East 5
North 4
South 2
West 5
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Eggington
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Clipstone 5
Village 2
Table 4
Wards of the parish of Houghton Regis
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Houghton Hall 5
Parkside 4
Tithe Farm 5
Table 5
Wards of the parish of Leighton-Linslade
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Barnabas 3
Bassett 1
Brooklands 2
Grovebury 4
Leston 1
Planets 3
Plantation 2
Southcott 3
St George’s 2EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Central Bedfordshire following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district of Central Bedfordshire remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Central Bedfordshire and replaces them with 31 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential on the changes made by article 3. The changes to parish wards introduced by article 4 come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2023.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/eastern/bedfordshire/central-bedfordshire.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.