STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 887
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Bracknell Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021
Made
22nd July 2021
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated December 2020 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Bracknell Forest. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation and commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Bracknell Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Bracknell Forest (Electoral Changes) Order 2021”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/berkshire/bracknell-forest.Wards of the borough of Bracknell Forest and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Bracknell Forest are abolished.
(2) The borough of Bracknell Forest is divided into the 15 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Binfield, Bracknell, Sandhurst, Warfield and Winkfield
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Binfield, Bracknell, Sandhurst, Warfield and Winkfield are abolished.
(2) The parish of Binfield is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Bracknell is divided into the 13 parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Sandhurst is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Warfield is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Winkfield is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(8) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
22nd July 2021Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of wards and number of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Binfield North & Warfield West 3
Binfield South & Jennett’s Park 3
Bullbrook 2
Crowthorne 3
Easthampstead & Wildridings 3
Great Hollands 3
Hanworth 3
Harmans Water & Crown Wood 3
Owlsmoor & College Town 3
Priestwood & Garth 3
Sandhurst 3
Swinley Forest 2
Town Centre & The Parks 2
Whitegrove 2
Winkfield & Warfield East 3Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Binfield
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Binfield North 4
Binfield South 7
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Bracknell
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Birch Hill 2
Bullbrook 3
Crown Wood 2
Garth 2
Great Hollands North 2
Great Hollands South 2
Hanworth 2
Harmans Water 2
Jennett’s Park 2
Old Bracknell 2
Priestwood 2
Town Centre 2
Wildridings 2
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Sandhurst
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Central Sandhurst 6
College Town 6
Little Sandhurst 5
Owlsmoor 7
Table 4
Wards of the parish of Warfield
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Garth North 1
Warfield East 1
St Michaels 2
Warfield Park 1
Whitegrove 6
Quelm 2
Table 5
Wards of the parish of Winkfield
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ascot Priory 1
Forest Park 5
Martins Heron & Warren 2
North Ascot 5
Winkfield & Cranbourne 5EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the borough of Bracknell Forest following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the borough of Bracknell Forest remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Bracknell Forest and replaces them with 15 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential on the changes made by article 3. The changes to parish wards introduced by article 4 come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2023.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/berkshire/bracknell-forest.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.