STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 645
WILDLIFE
The Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97) (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2021
Made
28th May 2021
Laid before Parliament
1st June 2021
Coming into force
22nd June 2021
The Secretary of State, in exercise of the powers conferred by Articles 18(3) and 19(5) of Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein(1), makes the following Regulations.
(1)
EUR 1997/338. Article 18 was substituted by S.I. 2020/1395. Article 19 was amended by that instrument.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97) (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2021.
(2) These Regulations come into force on 22nd June 2021.Amendments to the Annex to Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97
2.—(1) The Annex to Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein(1) is amended as follows.
(2) In the section headed “Notes on interpretation of Annexes A, B, C and D”, in paragraph 12, in the description for annotation #13, after “thereof” insert “, except finished products packaged and ready for retail trade”.
(3) The table which sets out Annexes A to C is amended in accordance with paragraphs 4 to 10.
(4) In the rows relating to PASSERIFORMES, before the rows relating to Atrichornithidae insert—
“Alaudidae Larks
Alauda arvensis (III Ukraine) Eurasian lark
Galerida cristata (III Ukraine) Crested lark
Lullula arborea (III Ukraine) Wood lark
Melanocorypha calandra (III Ukraine) Calandra lark”.
(5) In the rows relating to Emberizidae, before the row relating to Gubernatrix cristata (II) insert—
“Emberiza citrinella (III Ukraine) Yellowhammer
Emberiza hortulana (III Ukraine)
Ortolan
Bunting”.
(6) For the rows relating to Fringillidae substitute—
“Fringillidae Finches
Carduelis cannabina (III Ukraine) Common linnet
Carduelis carduelis (III Ukraine) European goldfinch
Carduelis cucullata (I) Red siskin
Carduelis flammea (III Ukraine) Common redpoll
Carduelis hornemanni (III Ukraine) Arctic redpoll
Carduelis spinus (III Ukraine) Eurasian siskin
Carduelis yarrellii (II) Yellow-faced siskin
Carpodacus erythrinus (III Ukraine) Common rosefinch
Loxia curvirostra (III Ukraine) Red crossbill
Pyrrhula pyrrhula (III Ukraine) Eurasian bullfinch
Serinus serinus (III Ukraine) European serin”.
(7) For the rows relating to Muscicapidae substitute—
“Muscicapidae Old-world flycatchers, babblers, etc.
Acrocephalus rodericanus (III Mauritius) Rodrigues brush-warbler
Cyornis ruckii (II) Rueck’s blue-flycatcher
Dasyornis broadbenti litoralis (II) Western rufous bristlebird
Dasyornis longirostris (II) Western bristlebird
Erithacus rubecula (III Ukraine) European robin
Ficedula parva (III Ukraine) Red-breasted flycatcher
Garrulax canorus (II) Chinese Hwamei
Garrulax taewanus (II) Taiwan Hwamei
Hippolais icterina (III Ukraine) Icterine warbler
Leiothrix argentauris (II) Silver-eared mesia
Leiothrix lutea (II) Red-billed leiothrix
Liocichla omeiensis (II) Omei Shan liocichla
Luscinia luscinia (III Ukraine) Thrush nightingale
Luscinia megarhynchos (III Ukraine) Common nightingale
Luscinia svecica (III Ukraine) Bluethroat
Monticola saxatilis (III Ukraine) Common rock thrush
Picathartes gymnocephalus (I) White-necked rockfowl
Picathartes oreas (I) Grey-necked rockfowl
Sylvia atricapilla (III Ukraine) Eurasian blackcap
Sylvia borin (III Ukraine) Garden warbler
Sylvia curruca (III Ukraine) Lesser whitethroat
Sylvia nisoria (III Ukraine) Barred warbler
Terpsiphone bourbonnensis (III Mauritius) Mascarene paradise-flycatcher
Turdus merula (III Ukraine) Eurasian blackbird
Turdus philomelos (III Ukraine) Song thrush
Oriolidae Old world orioles
Oriolus oriolus (III Ukraine) Eurasian golden oriole”.
(8) After the rows relating to Paradisaeidae insert—
“Paridae Tits
Parus ater (III Ukraine) Coal tit”.
(9) After the rows relating to Sturnidae insert—
“Troglodytidae Wrens
Troglodytes troglodytes (III Ukraine) Eurasian wren”.
(10) In the rows relating to Emydidae, after the row relating to Emydoidea blandingii (II) insert—
“Emys orbicularis (III Ukraine) European Pond Turtle”.
(1)
The Annex was amended by S.I. 2021/54.Goldsmith of Richmond Park
Minister of State
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
28th May 2021EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations implement changes to Appendix III to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (ratified by the United Kingdom on 2nd August 1976) which were notified to parties to the Convention on 24 March 2021 (Notification No. 2021/026) and which take effect on 22nd June 2021.
Regulation 2 amends the Annex to the retained EU law version of Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein (EUR 1997/338).
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sector is foreseen.