S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2022 No. 309 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Lincoln (Educational Endowments) (Barton on 
Humber Church of England Primary School) Order 2022 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15th March 2022 
Coming into force - 
- 
16th March 2022 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation relating to the teacher’s house at Barton 
on Humber Church of England Primary School in the county of Lincolnshire is or has been held in 
connection with the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of 
England at a voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of 
such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 24th June 1844 and made between (1) George 
Robinson, Thomas Wright and Charles Bell and (2) the Reverend George Uppleby, Bryan 
Hesleden, William Hesleden Eddie, Joseph Anderton, John Huntsman, James Raby, John Wilson, 
John Cart and William Goodlad Todd. 
The proceeds of sale of the former school premises, being part of the property comprised in the 
above mentioned deed, were the subject of an agreement dated 10th January 2011 between 
Humberside County Council and the Diocese of Lincoln pursuant to paragraph 2(6) of Schedule 3 
to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998(a) whereby the said proceeds of sale were paid 
to Humberside County Council. 
The assets representing the remainder of the endowment consist of: (a) £20,229.95 being the net 
proceeds of sale of the former teacher’s house, being the remainder of the property comprised in 
the above mentioned deed, and held on deposit at CCLA Investment Management Limited and (b) 
any income derived from those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited, which body 
appears to the Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the 
purpose. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1998 c. 31 (“the 1998 Act”). The transitional and saving provisions contained in paragraph 10(2) of Schedule 32 to the 1998 
Act apply. Paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the 1998 Act is amended by paragraph 10(2) of Schedule 2 to S.I. 2010/1158 and 
paragraph 22 of Schedule 4 to the Education and Inspections Act 2006 (c. 40). There are other amendments to paragraph 2 
of Schedule 3 to the 1998 Act which are not relevant to this Order.  
 
2
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
A trust under section 1 of the Reverter of Sites Act 1987(b) has arisen in relation to the assets of 
the endowment and the Secretary of State is satisfied that all reasonably practicable steps to trace 
any person who is or may become entitled as a beneficiary under the trust have been taken and 
that consent to the making of an order under section 554 of the Education Act 1996 has been given 
by every person whose claim to be such a person is outstanding (within the meaning of the said 
Act of 1987) or which has at any time been accepted as valid by the trustees or by persons whose 
acceptance binds or will bind the trustees, or which has been upheld in proceedings that have been 
concluded (within the meaning of the said Act of 1987). 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(c) and section 5 of the Reverter of Sites Act 
1987(d). 
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Lincoln (Educational Endowments) (Barton on 
Humber Church of England Primary School) Order 2022 and comes into force on the day after the 
day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation being a deed dated 24th June 1844 and made 
between (1) George Robinson, Thomas Wright and Charles Bell and (2) the Reverend George 
Uppleby, Bryan Hesleden,  William Hesleden Eddie, Joseph Anderton, John Huntsman, James 
Raby, John Wilson, John Cart and William Goodlad Todd; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Barton on Humber Church of 
England Primary School; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £20,229.95 held on deposit at CCLA Investment Management 
Limited representing the net proceeds of sale of the teacher’s house at Barton on Humber 
Church of England Primary School, together with any income derived from those assets 
(whether before or after the operative date). 
 
Extinguishment of rights under the Reverter of Sites Act trust 
3. The rights of any person who is or may become entitled under the trust which has arisen by 
virtue of section 1 of the Reverter of Sites Act 1987 in respect of the trust assets are extinguished. 
Division of foundation and trust assets 
4.—(1) The trust assets must be divided into two separate trust funds, namely— 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) 1987 c. 15. Section 1 was amended by Schedule 2 to the Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996 (c. 47).  
(c) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
(d) Section 5(1) was amended by Schedule 37 to the Education Act 1996 (c. 56). 
 
3
(a) the Barton on Humber Church of England Primary School Fund (“the School Fund”) 
comprising eleven-fourteenths of the trust assets; and 
(b) the Barton on Humber Church of England Primary School Religious Education Fund 
(“the Religious Education Fund”) comprising three-fourteenths of the trust assets. 
(2) The apportionment of the trust assets required by virtue of this article must be made in every 
case after payment of any expenses of administration in accordance with article 6(1). 
Trustee and vesting 
5.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be the trustee of— 
(a) the foundation; 
(b) the trust assets; and 
(c) the School Fund established by article 4(1)(a). 
(2) The Incumbent and Churchwardens for the time being of the Parish of Barton on Humber are 
hereby appointed to be the trustees of the Religious Education Fund established by article 4(1)(b). 
(3) All funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by any persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
6.—(1) After payment of any expenses of administration the Diocesan Board must account for 
that proportion of the capital and income of the trust assets of the foundation which represents the 
Religious Education Fund, to the trustees of that fund. 
(2) The trustees of the Religious Education Fund must apply the income, and may apply the 
capital of that fund, for educational purposes related to the Parish of Barton on Humber in 
connection with the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of 
England by means of a Sunday School or otherwise. 
(3) The Diocesan Board must hold the School Fund on the terms set out in the Schedule (being 
the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
 
Consolidation 
7. The School Fund must be consolidated with the School Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated 
funds(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the School Buildings Section 86/2 
accumulated funds.  
 
 
Signed by the authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
15th March 2022 
Department for Education 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c. 18). 
(b) The trustee of the School Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated funds is the Diocesan Board. The assets of the School 
Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated funds are held on the uniform statutory trusts. 
 
4
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 6(3) 
The Uniform Statutory Trusts 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Lincoln; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided; 
“relevant trust assets” means the School Fund;   
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the administration 
of the trust, apply the capital and income of the relevant trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the relevant trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area;  
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the relevant trust assets for either of the purposes 
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
purposes referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited as trustee of the 
foundation known as Barton on Humber Church of England Primary School and makes new 
provision as to the use of the endowment of that foundation. It creates a separate foundation for 
the purpose of providing religious education in accordance with the doctrines of the Church of 
England within the Parish of Barton on Humber. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
 
5
The Order provides for the relevant trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as the 
School Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated funds and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set 
out in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of Lincoln. 
The Order extinguishes the rights of any beneficiary under the trust which has arisen under section 
1 of the Reverter of Sites Act 1987. 
