W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2019 No. 1518 (W. 280) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A55 Trunk Road (Conwy 
Tunnel, Conwy County Borough) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions and 
Restrictions) Order 2019 
Made 
31 December 2019 
Coming into force 
6 January 2020 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the 
relevant length of the A55 Trunk Road, are satisfied 
that traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road 
should be prohibited and/or restricted because of 
works proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by sections 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation 
1. The title of this Order is the A55 Trunk Road 
(Conwy Tunnel, Conwy County Borough) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions and Restrictions) Order 2019 and 
it comes into force on 6 January 2020. 
2. In this Order: 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used for the purposes 
described in section 87 of the Road Traffic 
Regulation Act 1984(2); and 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
(2) 
Section 87 was amended by the Fire and Rescue Services 
Act 2004 (c.21), Schedule 1, paragraph 55, the Serious 
Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c.15), Schedule 4, 
paragraph 42, the Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c.22), 
Schedule 8, paragraph 29(2) and the Deregulation Act 2015 
(c.20), section 50(4) and (5). 
 
2
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or air 
force purposes and being driven by a person for 
the time being subject to the orders of a member of 
the armed forces of the Crown, who is a member 
of the special forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A55 
Chester to Bangor Trunk Road; 
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent  periods commencing at 19:00 hours on 
6 January 2020 and ending when the temporary 
traffic signs for each period of works are removed. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on either 
the eastbound or westbound carriageway of the length 
of the trunk road specified in Schedule 1 to this Order. 
4.—(1) Whilst movement is, by article 3, prohibited 
in the eastbound carriageway but pursuant to article 12 
not prohibited in the westbound carriageway, no 
person may, during the works period, drive or cause or 
permit any vehicle to: 
(i) proceed in the offside lane of the 
westbound carriageway of the length of 
the trunk road in any direction other than 
eastwards; 
(ii) proceed in any direction other than 
eastwards through either of the gaps in 
the central reservation of the length of 
the trunk road specified in Schedule 2 to 
this Order. 
(2) Whilst movement is, by article 3, prohibited 
in the westbound carriageway but pursuant to 
article 12 not prohibited in the eastbound 
carriageway, no person may, during the works 
period, drive or cause or permit any vehicle to: 
(i) proceed in the offside lane of the 
eastbound  carriageway of the length of 
the trunk road in any direction other than 
westwards; 
(ii) proceed in any direction other than 
westwards through either of the gaps in 
the central reservation of the length of 
 
3
the trunk road specified in Schedule 2 to 
this Order. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on the 
lengths of the trunk road specified in Schedule 3 to this 
Order. 
6. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle at a speed exceeding 40 miles per hour on 
the lengths of the trunk road specified in Schedule 4 to 
this Order. 
7. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle to proceed at a speed exceeding 50 miles 
per hour on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 5 to this Order. 
8. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle with a width of or exceeding 3.2 metres or 
3.7 metres on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 6 to this Order. 
9. No person may, during the works period, ride any 
pedal cycle on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 7 to this Order. 
10. No pedestrian may, during the works period, 
proceed on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 7 to this Order. 
11. No person may, during the works period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, in such a way that it overtakes any other 
vehicle on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 1 to this Order. 
Application 
12.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 apply only at such times 
and to such extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply 
to an exempted vehicle. 
Suspension 
13. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedules 4 and 5 to this Order are suspended during 
such times as the restrictions specified in article 6 and 
7 are in operation. 
Duration of this Order 
14. The maximum duration of this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Signed under authority of the Minister for Economy 
and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
 
Dated the                                        31 December 2019 
 
 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Planning, Asset Management & Standards 
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
Contraflow 
 
The length of the trunk road that extends from a point 
297 metres east of the eastern portal of the Conwy 
Tunnel to a point 446 metres west of the western portal 
of the Conwy Tunnel. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
Limits of the central reserve gaps 
 
The gap in the central reservation situated between a 
point 202 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Conwy Tunnel and a point 297 metres east of that 
portal. 
 
The gap in the central reservation situated between a 
point 353 metres west of the western portal of the 
Conwy Tunnel and a point 446 metres west of that 
portal. 
 
SCHEDULE 3 
Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the eastbound exit 
slip road at Junction 17 (Conwy Morfa Interchange) to 
the centre-point of Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction 
Interchange), including the lengths of the eastbound 
entry slip road at Junction 17 and eastbound exit slip 
road at Junction 18. 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the westbound 
exit slip road at Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction 
Interchange) to the centre-point of the Junction 17 
(Conwy Morfa Interchange) over-bridge, including the 
lengths of the westbound entry slip road at Junction 18 
and westbound exit slip road at Junction 17. 
 
SCHEDULE 4 
Temporary 40 mph Speed Limit 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the centre-point of Red Gables 
Viaduct over-bridge to a point 191 metres west of the 
western portal of Penmaenbach eastbound headland 
tunnel. 
 
5
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the centre-point of Brompton 
Avenue over-bridge to a point 787 meters east of the 
eastern portal of the Penmaenbach eastbound headland 
tunnel, including the central reserve gaps as defined in 
Schedule 3. 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from point 787 metres east of the 
eastern portal of the Penmaenbach eastbound headland 
tunnel to the centre-point of Brompton Avenue over-
bridge. 
 
The lengths of the eastbound and westbound exit and 
entry slip roads at Junction 17 (Conwy Morfa 
Interchange), 
Junction 
18 
(Llandudno 
Junction 
Interchange) 
and 
Junction 
19 
(Glan 
Conwy 
Interchange). 
 
SCHEDULE 5 
Temporary 50 mph Speed Limit 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the centre-point of Brompton 
Avenue over-bridge to the nosing of the westbound 
exit slip road at Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction 
Interchange). 
  
SCHEDULE 6 
Vehicle Width Restriction 
 
The length of the eastbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 30 metres east of the 
centre-point of Junction 16 (Puffin Roundabout) to the  
nosing of the eastbound entry slip road at Junction 19 
(Black Cat Interchange), including the entry slip roads 
at Junction 17 (Conwy Morfa Interchange) and 
Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction Interchange). 
 
The length of the westbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the westbound 
exit slip road at Junction 19 (Black Cat Interchange) to 
a point 30 metres east of the centre-point of Junction 
16 (Puffin Roundabout), including the westbound 
entry slip roads at Junction 19 (Black Cat Interchange), 
Junction 18 (Llandudno Junction Interchange) and 
Junction 17 (Conwy Morfa Interchange). 
 
SCHEDULE 7 
Temporary Prohibition of Cyclists & Pedestrians 
 
The length of the cycleway/footpath that extends from 
a point 787 metres east of the eastern portal of the 
Penmaenbach Eastbound Headland Tunnel, including 
the length of cycleway/footpath adjacent to the 
Junction 17 eastbound exit slip road, to its abutment 
with the A547 at the end of that slip road. 
