Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The West Northamptonshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2024
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated August 2023(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of West Northamptonshire. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-northamptonshire.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the West Northamptonshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2024.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on 15th October 2024.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2024;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2025.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the West Northamptonshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2024”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-northamptonshire.Wards of the district of West Northamptonshire and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of West Northamptonshire are abolished.
(2) The district of West Northamptonshire is divided into the 35 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parishes of Boughton, Daventry, Hackleton, Kingsthorpe and Northampton, and number of councillors
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Boughton, Daventry, Hackleton, Kingsthorpe and Northampton are abolished.
(2) The parish of Boughton is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Daventry is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Hackleton is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Kingsthorpe is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Northampton is divided into the 13 parish wards listed in the first column of table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(8) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of West Northamptonshire and number of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Abington & Phippsville 2
Billing 2
Blackthorn & Rectory Farm 2
Brackley 3
Braunston & Crick 2
Brixworth 1
Campion 2
Castle 3
Cogenhoe & The Houghtons 1
Dallington Spencer 3
Daventry North East 1
Daventry North West 1
Daventry South 3
Deanshanger & Paulerspury 2
Duston 3
Far Cotton, Delapre & Briar Hill 3
Hackleton & Roade 2
Headlands 3
Hunsbury 3
Kingsley & Semilong 2
Kingsthorpe North 3
Kingsthorpe South 2
Long Buckby 2
Middleton Cheney 2
Moulton 3
Naseby 1
Nene Valley 3
Parklands 1
Rural North East 1
Rural South Northamptonshire 3
Talavera 2
Towcester 3
Upton 2
Weston Favell & Abington Vale 2
Woodford & Weedon 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Boughton and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Boughton Village & Buckton Fields 10
Dixon Road 1
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Daventry and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Daventry North East 3
Daventry North West 3
Daventry South 10
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of Hackleton and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Hackleton & Piddington 6
Hackleton Urban 5
Table 4
Parish wards of the parish of Kingsthorpe and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Kingsthorpe 3
Obelisk East 1
Spring Park 3
St David’s 4
Sunnyside & Obelisk West 4
Table 5
Parish wards of the parish of Northampton and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Abington & Phippsville 2
Billing Aquadrome 1
Blackthorn & Rectory Farm 2
Briar Hill 1
Castle 3
Dallington Spencer 3
Headlands 4
Kingsley & Semilong 2
Moulton Leys 1
Parklands 1
Queens Park 1
Talavera 2
Weston Favell & Abington Vale 2EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of West Northamptonshire following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of West Northamptonshire and replaces them with 35 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2025. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards in the parishes of Boughton, Daventry, Hackleton, Kingsthorpe and Northampton. These changes come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2025 and subsequent parish elections. Tables 1 to 5 of Schedule 2 contain the names of the new parish wards and the number of councillors for each.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-northamptonshire.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.