Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Calderdale (Electoral Changes) Order 2024
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2), (3) and (4)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated May 2024(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Calderdale. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/calderdale/.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Calderdale (Electoral Changes) Order 2024.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on 15th October 2025.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2025;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2026.
(4) Article 5 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2026;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2027.
(5) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Calderdale (Electoral Changes) Order 2024”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/calderdale/.Wards of the borough of Calderdale and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Calderdale are abolished.
(2) The borough of Calderdale is divided into the 18 wards listed in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is three.Elections of the borough of Calderdale
4.—(1) Elections of all councillors for each ward of the borough of Calderdale are to be held simultaneously on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2026.
(2) The councillors holding office for any ward abolished by article 3(1) immediately before the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in 2026 are to retire on that fourth day, and the newly elected councillors are to come into office on that fourth day.
(3) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2026—
(a)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2027;
(b)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2028;
(c)
one is to retire on the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2030.
(4) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2026—
(a)
the first councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the smallest number of votes;
(b)
the second councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the next smallest number of votes.
(5) In the case of an equality of votes between any persons elected which makes it uncertain which of them is to retire in any year, the person to retire in that year is to be determined by lot.
(6) If an election of councillors for any ward is not contested, the person to retire in each year is to be determined by lot.
(7) An election to replace a councillor who is to retire under paragraph (3) is to be held on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in the year in which the retirement is due to take place, and any newly elected councillor is to come into office on the fourth day after that day.
(8) Where under this article any question is to be determined by lot, the lot is to be drawn at the next practicable meeting of the council after the question has arisen and the drawing is to be conducted under the direction of the person presiding at the meeting.Parish wards of the parishes of Hebden Royd and Stainland & District and number of councillors
5.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Hebden Royd and Stainland & District are abolished.
(2) The parish of Hebden Royd is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Stainland & District is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(5) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
Schedule 1
Wards of the borough of Calderdale
1.
Brighouse
2.
Elland
3.
Greetland
4.
Halifax Town
5.
Hebden Bridge & Todmorden East
6.
Hipperholme & Lightcliffe
7.
Illingworth & Mixenden
8.
Luddendenfoot
9.
Northowram & Shelf
10.
Ovenden
11.
Park
12.
Rastrick
13.
Ryburn
14.
Salterhebble, Southowram & Skircoat Green
15.
Sowerby Bridge
16.
Todmorden West
17.
Wainhouse
18.
WarleyArticle 5
Schedule 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Hebden Royd and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Birchcliffe 3
Caldene 3
Cragg Vale 4
Fairfield 3
West End 2
White Lee 3
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Stainland & District and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Holywell Green 4
Sowood 2
Stainland 3EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Calderdale following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the borough remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Calderdale and replaces them with the 18 new ones listed in Schedule 1 for the purposes of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2026. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes provision for a whole borough council election in 2026. Subsequently, the council will return to the existing system of election by thirds. That article also provides for the order of retirement of councillors in 2027, 2028 and 2030 and the election of their replacements.
Article 5 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3. Those changes to parish wards come into force for the purposes of parish elections in 2027 and subsequent parish elections.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/calderdale.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant impact, on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.