Electricity Transmission (Compensation) Act 2023
2023 CHAPTER 19
An Act to require proposals to be drawn up for the use of alternative dispute resolution processes to determine the compensation payable to landowners in certain cases where land is acquired for the purposes of electricity transmission.
[24th May 2023]
Be it enacted by the King’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—1
Resolution of compensation disputes in electricity-related land acquisition cases
(1)
The Secretary of State must draw up proposals for the use of alternative dispute resolution processes in electricity-related land acquisition cases.
(2)
An “alternative dispute resolution process” is any process enabling the parties to a dispute to resolve the dispute out of court.
(3)
An “electricity-related land acquisition case” is a case where—
(a)
an order is made under section 114 of the Planning Act 2008 (orders granting development consent), and
(b)
the order authorises the acquisition of land for a purpose connected with the transmission of electricity.
“Transmission” in paragraph (b) has the meaning given in section 4(4) of the Electricity Act 1989.
(4)
The Secretary of State’s proposals must include proposals for ensuring—
(a)
that alternative dispute resolution processes are available for determining the amount of compensation to be paid to landowners in electricity-related land acquisition cases,
(b)
that the processes are accessible to landowners without undue difficulty or expense,
(c)
that the processes are operated, and determinations reached, in a way that is independent of the parties to the dispute, and
(d)
that determinations are enforceable.
(5)
The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament a report containing the proposals drawn up under this section.
(6)
Before laying the report the Secretary of State must consult such persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
Commencement Information
I1
S. 1 in force at 24.7.2023, see s. 2(2)2
Extent, commencement and short title
(1)
This Act extends to England and Wales and Scotland.
(2)
This Act comes into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which it is passed.
(3)
This Act may be cited as the Electricity Transmission (Compensation) Act 2023.
Commencement Information
I1
S. 2 in force at 24.7.2023, see s. 2(2)