STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 155
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Tewkesbury (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
14th February 2023
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2), (3) and (4)
Under section 92(2) of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007(1), Tewkesbury Borough Council (“the Council”) made recommendations in a review to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) for the related alteration of the boundaries of a number of borough wards and county electoral divisions within the Council’s area.
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England has decided to give effect to the recommendations and makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 92(3) of that Act.
(1)
2007 c. 28 (“the 2007 Act”). Section 92 was amended by paragraph 32 of Schedule 4 to the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 (c. 20) (“the 2009 Act”).
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the 2009 Act. The functions of the Electoral Commission under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the 2007 Act were transferred under section 60 of the 2009 Act to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England on 1st April 2010.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Tewkesbury (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Article 3 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) Article 4 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2025.
(5) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.  In this Order—
“the Council’s Order” means the Tewkesbury Borough Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 1) Order 2022(1);
“Map 7” means the map numbered 7 that forms part of the “Map referred to in ‘Tewkesbury Borough Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 1) Order 2022’” referred to in the Council’s Order.
(1)
That Order was made by Tewkesbury Borough Council on 10th October 2022, and is available for inspection at the offices of Tewkesbury Borough Council, Council Offices, Gloucester Road, Tewkesbury GL20 5TT.Alteration of borough ward boundaries
3.—(1) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Ashchurch Rural and becomes part of the parish of Wheatpieces by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Isbourne borough ward and becomes part of the Tewkesbury East borough ward.
(2) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Southam and becomes part of the parish of Bishops Cleeve by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Cleeve Hill borough ward and becomes part of the Cleeve Grange borough ward.
(3) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Innsworth and becomes part of the parish of Churchdown by virtue of the Council’s Order, that area being hatched blue on Map 7, ceases to be part of the Innsworth borough ward and becomes part of the Churchdown St John’s borough ward.
(4) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Innsworth and becomes part of the parish of Churchdown by virtue of the Council’s Order, that area being hatched red on Map 7, ceases to be part of the Innsworth borough ward and becomes part of the Churchdown Brookfield with Hucclecote borough ward.
(5) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Badgeworth and becomes part of the parish of Churchdown by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Badgeworth borough ward and becomes part of the Churchdown Brookfield with Hucclecote borough ward.Alteration of county electoral division boundaries
4.—(1) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Southam and becomes part of the parish of Bishops Cleeve by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Winchcombe & Woodmancote county electoral division and becomes part of the Bishops Cleeve county electoral division.
(2) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Innsworth and becomes part of the parish of Churchdown by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Highnam county electoral division and becomes part of the Churchdown county electoral division.
(3) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Badgeworth and becomes part of the parish of Churchdown by virtue of the Council’s Order ceases to be part of the Brockworth county electoral division and becomes part of the Churchdown county electoral division.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
14th February 2023EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order gives effect to recommendations made by Tewkesbury Borough Council to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England for related alterations to a number of borough wards and county electoral divisions in the Council’s area.
The alterations are a consequence of changes to parish boundaries and warding arrangements under the Tewkesbury Borough Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 1) Order 2022, which was made by Tewkesbury Borough Council under powers including section 86 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (c. 28). A hard copy of that Order is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of Tewkesbury Borough Council, Council Offices, Gloucester Road, Tewkesbury GL20 5TT.
The changes described in article 3 (in relation to borough wards) apply in respect of elections to be held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. The changes described in article 4 (in relation to county electoral divisions) apply in respect of elections to be held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2025.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.