S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2023 No. 1044 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Chichester (Educational Endowments) 
(Balcombe Church of England Primary School Teacher’s House) 
Order 2023 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
25th September 2023 
Coming into force - 
- 
26th September 2023 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation relating to the teacher’s house at 
Balcombe Church of England Primary School in the county of West Sussex is or has been held in 
connection with the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of 
England at a voluntary school, and that the premises of the said teacher’s house have ceased to be 
used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a scheme dated 25th September 1964 and framed by the Secretary 
of State for Education and Science under the Endowed Schools Acts 1869 to 1948. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £38,645 being the net proceeds of sale of 
the teacher’s house comprised in the scheme and held on deposit by the Chichester Diocesan Fund 
and Board of Finance (Incorporated); and (b) any income derived from those proceeds of sale 
before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Chichester Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c.56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998(c.31). 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Chichester (Educational Endowments) (Balcombe 
Church of England Primary School Teacher’s House ) Order 2023 and comes into force on the day 
after the day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Chichester Diocesan Fund and Board of Finance 
(Incorporated); 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the scheme; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Balcombe Church of England 
Primary School Teacher’s House; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £38,645 held on deposit account at the Diocesan Board 
representing the endowment of the foundation being the net proceeds of sale of the teacher’s 
house at Balcombe Church of England Primary School, together with any income derived 
from those assets (whether before or after the operative date); 
“the scheme” means the scheme dated 25th September 1964 and framed by the Secretary of 
State for Education and Science under the Endowed Schools Acts 1869 to 1948; 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4. After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with the fund known as the Diocese of Chichester 
Consolidated Educational Endowments(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the 
Diocese of Chichester Consolidated Educational Endowments. 
Consultation 
6. The Diocesan Board must consult the Chichester Diocesan Board of Education with regard to 
the exercise of the powers and functions conferred on it by this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005(c.18). 
(b) The trustee of the fund known as the Diocese of Chichester Consolidated Educational Endowments is the Diocesan Board. 
The assets of the fund known as the Diocese of Chichester Consolidated Educational Endowments are held on the uniform 
statutory trusts. 
 
3
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
25th September 2023 
Department for Education 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Chichester; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order makes new provision as to the use of the endowment of the foundation known as 
Balcombe Church of England Primary School Teacher’s House. 
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as the Diocese of 
Chichester Consolidated Educational Endowments and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set 
out in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c.18. 
 
4
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of Chichester. 
