STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 841
CAPITAL GAINS TAX
CORPORATION TAX
INCOME TAX
The Double Taxation Relief and International Tax Enforcement (San Marino) Order 2023
Made
19th July 2023
At the Buckingham Palace, the 19th day of July 2023
Present,
The King’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council
A draft of this Order was laid before the House of Commons in accordance with section 5(2) of the Taxation (International and Other Provisions) Act 2010(1) and section 173(7) of the Finance Act 2006(2) and approved by resolution of that House.
Accordingly, His Majesty, in exercising the powers conferred on Him by section 2 of the Taxation (International and Other Provisions) Act 2010 and section 173(1) to (3) of the Finance Act 2006, by and with the advice of His Privy Council, orders as follows—
(1)
2010 c. 8.
(2)
2006 c. 25.Citation
1.  This Order may be cited as the Double Taxation Relief and International Tax Enforcement (San Marino) Order 2023.Double taxation and international tax enforcement arrangements to have effect
2.  It is declared that—
(a)
the arrangements specified in the Convention and Protocol set out in the Schedule to this Order have been made with the Government of the Republic of San Marino;
(b)
those arrangements have been made with a view to affording relief from double taxation in relation to income tax, corporation tax, capital gains tax, and taxes of a similar character imposed by the laws of the Republic of San Marino, and relate to international tax enforcement; and
(c)
it is expedient that those arrangements should have effect.Ceri King
Deputy Clerk of the Privy CouncilArticle 2
SCHEDULE
CONVENTION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO FOR THE ELIMINATION OF DOUBLE TAXATION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME AND ON CAPITAL AND THE PREVENTION OF TAX EVASION AND AVOIDANCE
The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Republic of San Marino;
Desiring to further develop their economic relationship and to enhance their cooperation in tax matters;
Intending to conclude a Convention for the elimination of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and on capital and without creating opportunities for non-taxation or reduced taxation through tax evasion or avoidance (including through treaty-shopping arrangements aimed at obtaining reliefs provided in this Convention for the indirect benefit of residents of third States);
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
Persons covered
1.  This Convention shall apply to persons who are residents of one or both of the Contracting States.
2.  For the purposes of this Convention, income or gains derived by or through an entity or arrangement that is treated as wholly or partly fiscally transparent under the tax law of either Contracting State shall be considered to be income or gains of a resident of a Contracting State but only to the extent that the income or gain is treated, for purposes of taxation by that State, as the income or gain of a resident of that State.
3.  This Convention shall not affect the taxation, by a Contracting State, of its residents except with respect to the benefits granted under paragraph 3 of Article 7, paragraph 2 of Article 9 and Articles 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24 and 26.
ARTICLE 2
Taxes covered
1.  This Convention shall apply to taxes on income and on capital imposed on behalf of a Contracting State or of its political subdivisions or local authorities, irrespective of the manner in which they are levied.
2.  There shall be regarded as taxes on income and on capital all taxes imposed on total income, or on elements of income, including taxes on gains from the alienation of movable or immovable property.
3.  The existing taxes to which the Convention shall apply are in particular:
(a)
in the case of San Marino:
the general income tax which is levied:
(i)
on individuals;
(ii)
on bodies corporate and proprietorships;
(hereinafter referred to as “San Marino tax”);
(b)
in the case of the United Kingdom:
(i)
the income tax;
(ii)
the corporation tax; and
(iii)
the capital gains tax;
(hereinafter referred to as “United Kingdom tax”).
4.  The Convention shall apply also to any identical or substantially similar taxes that are imposed after the date of signature of the Convention in addition to, or in place of, the existing taxes. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall notify each other of any significant changes that have been made in their taxation laws.
ARTICLE 3
General definitions
1.  For the purposes of this Convention, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a)
the term “San Marino” means the territory of the Republic of San Marino, including any other area within which the Republic of San Marino, in accordance with international law, exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction;
(b)
the term “United Kingdom” means Great Britain and Northern Ireland but, when used in a geographical sense, means the territory and territorial sea of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the areas beyond that territorial sea over which Great Britain and Northern Ireland exercise sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with their domestic law and international law;
(c)
the terms “a Contracting State” and “the other Contracting State” mean, as the context requires, San Marino or the United Kingdom;
(d)
the term “person” includes an individual, a company and any other body of persons;
(e)
the term “company” means any body corporate or any entity that is treated as a body corporate for tax purposes;
(f)
the term “enterprise” applies to the carrying on of any business;
(g)
the terms “enterprise of a Contracting State” and “enterprise of the other Contracting State” mean respectively an enterprise carried on by a resident of a Contracting State and an enterprise carried on by a resident of the other Contracting State;
(h)
the term “international traffic” means any transport by a ship or aircraft, except when the ship or aircraft is operated solely between places in a Contracting State and the enterprise that operates the ship or aircraft is not an enterprise of that State;
(i)
the term “competent authority” means:
(i)
in San Marino, the Ministry of Finance or its authorised representative, and, for the purposes of Article 25 “Exchange of information”, the Central Liaison Office of the Republic of San Marino;
(ii)
in the United Kingdom, the Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs or their authorised representative;
(j)
the term “national” means:
(i)
in relation to San Marino, any individual possessing the nationality or citizenship of San Marino, any legal person, partnership or association deriving its status as such from the laws in force in San Marino;
(ii)
in relation to the United Kingdom, any British citizen, or any British subject not possessing the citizenship of any other Commonwealth country or territory, provided he has the right of abode in the United Kingdom; and any legal person, partnership or association deriving its status as such from the laws in force in the United Kingdom;
(k)
the term “business” includes the performance of professional services and of other activities of an independent character;
(l)
the term “pension scheme” of a Contracting State means an entity or arrangement established in that State that is treated as a separate person under the taxation laws of that State and:
(i)
that is established and operated exclusively or almost exclusively to administer or provide retirement benefits and ancillary or incidental benefits to individuals and that is regulated as such by that State or one of its political subdivisions or local authorities; or
(ii)
that is established and operated exclusively or almost exclusively to invest funds for the benefit of entities or arrangements referred to in subdivision (i).
Where an arrangement established in a Contracting State would constitute a pension scheme under subdivision (i) or (ii) if it were treated as a separate person under the taxation laws of that State, it shall be considered, for the purposes of this Convention, as a separate person treated as such under the taxation laws of that State and all the assets, income and gains to which the arrangement applies shall be treated as assets held and income and gains derived by that separate person and not by another person.
2.  As regards the application of the Convention at any time by a Contracting State, any term not defined therein shall, unless the context otherwise requires or the competent authorities agree to a different meaning pursuant to the provisions of Article 24, have the meaning that it has at that time under the law of that State for the purposes of the taxes to which this Convention applies, any meaning under the applicable tax laws of that State prevailing over a meaning given to the term under other laws of that State.
ARTICLE 4
Resident
1.  For the purposes of this Convention, the term “resident of a Contracting State” means any person who, under the laws of that State, is liable to tax therein by reason of his domicile, residence, place of management, place of incorporation or any other criterion of a similar nature, and also includes that State and any political subdivision or local authority thereof. This term, however, does not include any person who is liable to tax in that State in respect only of income or capital gains from sources in that State.
2.  The term “resident of a Contracting State” includes
(a)
a pension scheme established in that State; and
(b)
an organisation that is established and is operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, cultural, or educational purposes (or for more than one of those purposes) and that is a resident of that State according to its laws, notwithstanding that all or part of its income or gains may be exempt from tax under the domestic law of that State.
3.  Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then his status shall be determined as follows:
(a)
he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State in which he has a permanent home available to him; if he has a permanent home available to him in both States, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State with which his personal and economic relations are closer (centre of vital interests);
(b)
if the State in which he has his centre of vital interests cannot be determined, or if he does not have a permanent home available to him in either State, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State in which he has an habitual abode;
(c)
if he has an habitual abode in both States or in neither of them, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State of which he is a national;
(d)
if he is a national of both States or of neither of them, the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall settle the question by mutual agreement.
4.  Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a person other than an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall endeavour to determine by mutual agreement the Contracting State of which such person shall be deemed to be a resident for the purposes of the Convention, having regard to its place of effective management, the place where it is incorporated or otherwise constituted and any other relevant factors. In the absence of such agreement, such person shall not be entitled to any relief or exemption from tax provided by this Convention, except to the extent and in such manner as may be agreed upon by the competent authorities of the Contracting States.
ARTICLE 5
Permanent establishment
1.  For the purposes of this Convention, the term “permanent establishment” means a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.
2.  The term “permanent establishment” includes especially:
(a)
a place of management;
(b)
a branch;
(c)
an office;
(d)
a factory;
(e)
a workshop; and
(f)
a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of natural resources.
3.  A building site or construction or installation project constitutes a permanent establishment only if it lasts more than twelve months.
4.  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term “permanent establishment” shall be deemed not to include:
(a)
the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise;
(b)
the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery;
(c)
the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of processing by another enterprise;
(d)
the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of purchasing goods or merchandise, or of collecting information, for the enterprise;
(e)
the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character;
(f)
the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for any combination of activities mentioned in sub-paragraphs a) to e), provided that the overall activity of the fixed place of business resulting from this combination is of a preparatory or auxiliary character.
5.  Paragraph 4 shall not apply to a fixed place of business that is used or maintained by an enterprise if the same enterprise or a closely related enterprise carries on business activities at the same place or at another place in the same Contracting State and
(a)
that place or other place constitutes a permanent establishment for the enterprise or the closely related enterprise under the provisions of this Article, or
(b)
the overall activity resulting from the combination of the activities carried on by the two enterprises at the same place, or by the same enterprise or closely related enterprises at the two places, is not of a preparatory or auxiliary character, provided that the business activities carried on by the two enterprises at the same place, or by the same enterprise or closely related enterprises at the two places, constitute complementary functions that are part of a cohesive business operation.
6.  For the purposes of paragraph 5, an enterprise is closely related to an enterprise if, based on all the relevant facts and circumstances, one has control of the other or both are under the control of the same persons or enterprises. In any case, an enterprise shall be considered to be closely related to an enterprise if one possesses directly or indirectly more than 50 per cent of the beneficial interest in the other (or, in the case of a company, more than 50 per cent of the aggregate vote and value of the company’s shares or of the beneficial equity interest in the company) or if another person or enterprise possesses directly or indirectly more than 50 per cent of the beneficial interest (or, in the case of a company, more than 50 per cent of the aggregate vote and value of the company’s shares or of the beneficial equity interest in the company) in the person and the enterprise or in the two enterprises.
7.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, where a person - other than an agent of an independent status to whom paragraph 8 applies - is acting on behalf of an enterprise and has, and habitually exercises, in a Contracting State an authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the enterprise, that enterprise shall be deemed to have a permanent establishment in that State in respect of any activities which that person undertakes for the enterprise, unless the activities of such person are limited to those mentioned in paragraph 4 which, if exercised through a fixed place of business, would not make this fixed place of business a permanent establishment under the provisions of that paragraph.
8.  An enterprise shall not be deemed to have a permanent establishment in a Contracting State merely because it carries on business in that State through a broker, general commission agent or any other agent of an independent status, provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of their business.
9.  The fact that a company which is a resident of a Contracting State controls or is controlled by a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which carries on business in that other State (whether through a permanent establishment or otherwise), shall not of itself constitute either company a permanent establishment of the other.
ARTICLE 6
Income from immovable property
1.  Income derived by a resident of a Contracting State from immovable property (including income from agriculture or forestry) situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
2.  The term “immovable property” shall have the meaning which it has under the law of the Contracting State in which the property in question is situated. The term shall in any case include property accessory to immovable property, livestock and equipment used in agriculture and forestry, rights to which the provisions of general law respecting landed property apply, usufruct of immovable property and rights to variable or fixed payments as consideration for the working of, or the right to work, mineral deposits, sources and other natural resources; ships, and aircraft shall not be regarded as immovable property.
3.  The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to income derived from the direct use, letting, or use in any other form of immovable property.
4.  The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3 shall also apply to the income from immovable property of an enterprise.
ARTICLE 7
Business profits
1.  Profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that State unless the enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein. If the enterprise carries on business as aforesaid, the profits that are attributable to the permanent establishment in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 may be taxed in that other State.
2.  For the purposes of this Article and Article 22, the profits that are attributable in each Contracting State to the permanent establishment referred to in paragraph 1 are the profits it might be expected to make, in particular in its dealings with other parts of the enterprise, if it were a separate and independent enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the same or similar conditions, taking into account the functions performed, assets used and risks assumed by the enterprise through the permanent establishment and through the other parts of the enterprise.
3.  Where, in accordance with paragraph 2, a Contracting State adjusts the profits that are attributable to a permanent establishment of an enterprise of one of the Contracting States and taxes accordingly profits of the enterprise that have been charged to tax in the other State, the other State shall, to the extent necessary to eliminate double taxation on these profits, make an appropriate adjustment to the amount of the tax charged on those profits. In determining such adjustment, the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall if necessary consult each other.
4.  Where profits include items of income or gains which are dealt with separately in other Articles of this Convention, then the provisions of those Articles shall not be affected by the provisions of this Article.
ARTICLE 8
International shipping and air transport
1.  Profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State from the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic shall be taxable only in that State.
2.  The provisions of paragraph 1 shall also apply to profits from the participation in a pool, a joint business or an international operating agency.
ARTICLE 9
Associated enterprises
1.  Where
(a)
an enterprise of a Contracting State participates directly or indirectly in the management, control or capital of an enterprise of the other Contracting State, or
(b)
the same persons participate directly or indirectly in the management, control or capital of an enterprise of a Contracting State and an enterprise of the other Contracting State,
and in either case conditions are made or imposed between the two enterprises in their commercial or financial relations which differ from those which would be made between independent enterprises, then any profits which would, but for those conditions, have accrued to one of the enterprises, but, by reason of those conditions, have not so accrued, may be included in the profits of that enterprise and taxed accordingly.
2.  Where a Contracting State includes in the profits of an enterprise of that State – and taxes accordingly – profits on which an enterprise of the other Contracting State has been charged to tax in that other State and the profits so included are profits which would have accrued to the enterprise of the first-mentioned State if the conditions made between the two enterprises had been those which would have been made between independent enterprises, then that other State shall make an appropriate adjustment to the amount of the tax charged therein on those profits. In determining such adjustment, due regard shall be had to the other provisions of this Convention and the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall if necessary consult each other.
ARTICLE 10
Dividends
1.  Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
2.  However, dividends paid by a company which is a resident of a Contracting State may also be taxed in that State and according to the laws of that State, but if the beneficial owner of the dividends is a resident of the other Contracting State:
(a)
except as provided in sub-paragraph b), such dividends shall be exempt from tax in the Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident;
(b)
where dividends are paid out of income (including gains) derived directly or indirectly from immovable property within the meaning of Article 6 by an investment vehicle which distributes most of this income annually and whose income from such immovable property is exempted from tax, the tax charged by the Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident shall not exceed 15 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends other than where the beneficial owner of the dividends is a pension scheme established in the other Contracting State, where the exemption provided in sub-paragraph a) shall apply.
This paragraph shall not affect the taxation of the company in respect of the profits out of which the dividends are paid.
3.  The term “dividends” as used in this Article means income from shares, “jouissance” shares or “jouissance” rights, mining shares, founders’ shares or other rights, not being debt-claims, participating in profits, as well as any other item which is treated as income from shares by the taxation laws of the State of which the company making the distribution is a resident.
4.  The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the dividends, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident through a permanent establishment situated therein and the holding in respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment. In such case the provisions of Article 7 shall apply.
5.  Where a company which is a resident of a Contracting State derives profits or income from the other Contracting State, that other State may not impose any tax on the dividends paid by the company, except insofar as such dividends are paid to a resident of that other State or insofar as the holding in respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected with a permanent establishment situated in that other State, nor subject the company’s undistributed profits to a tax on undistributed profits, even if the dividends paid or the undistributed profits consist wholly or partly of profits or income arising in that other State.
ARTICLE 11
Interest
1.  Interest arising in a Contracting State and paid to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
2.  However, interest arising in a Contracting State may also be taxed in that State according to the laws of that State, but if the beneficial owner of the interest is a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed 0 per cent of the gross amount of the interest.
3.  The term “interest” as used in this Article means income from debt-claims of every kind, whether or not secured by mortgage and whether or not carrying a right to participate in the debtor’s profits, and in particular, income from government securities and income from bonds or debentures, including premiums and prizes attaching to such securities, bonds or debentures. The term shall not include any item which is treated as a dividend under the provisions of Article 10.
4.  The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the interest, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State in which the interest arises through a permanent establishment situated therein and the debt-claim in respect of which the interest is paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment. In such case the provisions of Article 7 shall apply.
5.  Interest shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State when the payer is a resident of that State. Where, however, the person paying the interest, whether he is a resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting State a permanent establishment in connection with which the indebtedness on which the interest is paid was incurred, and such interest is borne by such permanent establishment, then such interest shall be deemed to arise in the Contracting State in which the permanent establishment is situated.
6.  Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of the interest paid, exceeds, for whatever reason, the amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the other provisions of this Convention.
ARTICLE 12
Royalties
1.  Royalties arising in a Contracting State and beneficially owned by a resident of the other Contracting State shall be taxable only in that other State.
2.  The term “royalties” as used in this Article means payments of any kind received as a consideration for the use of, or the right to use, any copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work, including cinematograph films and recordings for radio or television broadcasting, any patent, trade mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or process, or for information (know-how) concerning industrial, commercial or scientific experience.
3.  The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the royalties, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State in which the royalties arise through a permanent establishment situated therein and the right or property in respect of which the royalties are paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment. In such case the provisions of Article 7 shall apply.
4.  Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of the royalties paid exceeds, for whatever reason, the amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the other provisions of this Convention.
ARTICLE 13
Capital gains
1.  Gains derived by a resident of a Contracting State from the alienation of immovable property referred to in Article 6 and situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
2.  Gains from the alienation of movable property forming part of the business property of a permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting State has in the other Contracting State, including such gains from the alienation of such a permanent establishment (alone or with the whole enterprise), may be taxed in that other State.
3.  Gains that an enterprise of a Contracting State that operates ships or aircraft in international traffic derives from the alienation of such ships or aircraft, or of movable property pertaining to the operation of such ships or aircraft, shall be taxable only in that State.
4.  Gains derived by a resident of a Contracting State from the alienation of shares or comparable interests, such as interests in a partnership or trust, deriving more than 50 per cent of their value directly or indirectly from immovable property, as defined in Article 6, situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
5.  Gains from the alienation of any property, other than that referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall be taxable only in the Contracting State of which the alienator is a resident.
ARTICLE 14
Income from employment
1.  Subject to the provisions of Articles 15, 17, 18 and 19, salaries, wages and other similar remuneration derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an employment shall be taxable only in that State unless the employment is exercised in the other Contracting State. If the employment is so exercised, such remuneration as is derived therefrom may be taxed in that other State.
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, remuneration derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an employment exercised in the other Contracting State shall be taxable only in the first-mentioned State if:
(a)
the recipient is present in the other State for a period or periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in any twelve month period commencing or ending in the fiscal year concerned; and
(b)
the remuneration is paid by, or on behalf of, an employer who is not a resident of the other State; and
(c)
the remuneration is not borne by a permanent establishment which the employer has in the other State.
3.  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, remuneration derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an employment, as a member of the regular complement of a ship or aircraft, that is exercised aboard a ship or aircraft operated in international traffic, other than aboard a ship or aircraft operated solely within the other Contracting State, shall be taxable only in the first-mentioned State.
ARTICLE 15
Directors’ fees
Directors’ fees and other similar payments derived by a resident of a Contracting State in his capacity as a member of the board of directors of a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.
ARTICLE 16
Entertainers and sportspersons
1.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 14, income derived by a resident of a Contracting State as an entertainer, such as a theatre, motion picture, radio or television artiste, or a musician, or as a sportsperson, from that resident’s personal activities as such exercised in the other Contracting State, may be taxed in that other State.
2.  Where income in respect of personal activities exercised by an entertainer or a sportsperson acting as such accrues not to the entertainer or sportsperson but to another person, that income may, notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 7 and 14, be taxed in the Contracting State in which the activities of the entertainer or sportsperson are exercised.
ARTICLE 17
Pensions
1.  Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 18, pensions and other similar remuneration paid to a resident of a Contracting State, shall be taxable only in that State.
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, pensions and other payments made under the social security legislation of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that State.
ARTICLE 18
Government service
(1) (a) Salaries, wages and other similar remuneration paid by a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof to an individual in respect of services rendered to that State or subdivision or authority shall be taxable only in that State.
(b)
However, such salaries, wages and other similar remuneration shall be taxable only in the other Contracting State if the services are rendered in that State and the individual is a resident of that State who:
(i)
is a national of that State; or
(ii)
did not become a resident of that State solely for the purpose of rendering the services;
and is subject to tax in that State on such salaries, wages and other similar remuneration.
(2) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, pensions and other similar remuneration paid by, or out of funds created by, a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof to an individual in respect of services rendered to that State or subdivision or authority shall be taxable only in that State.
(b)
However, such pensions and other similar remuneration shall be taxable only in the other Contracting State if the individual is a resident of, and a national of, that State.
3.  The provisions of Articles 14, 15, 16 and 17 shall apply to salaries, wages, pensions, and other similar remuneration in respect of services rendered in connection with a business carried on by a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof.
ARTICLE 19
Professors, teachers
and researchers
A professor, teacher or researcher who makes a temporary visit to a Contracting State for a period not exceeding 2 years for the purpose of teaching or conducting research at a university, college, school, or other similar educational institution, and who is, or immediately before such visit was, a resident of the other Contracting State shall be taxable only in that other State in respect of remuneration from such teaching or research provided that such remuneration arises from sources outside the first mentioned State and is subject to tax in that other State.
ARTICLE 20
Students and business apprentices
Payments which a student or business apprentice who is or was immediately before visiting a Contracting State a resident of the other Contracting State and who is present in the first-mentioned State solely for the purpose of his education or training receives for the purpose of his maintenance, education or training shall not be taxed in that State, provided that such payments arise from sources outside that State.
ARTICLE 21
Other income
1.  Items of income beneficially owned by a resident of a Contracting State, wherever arising, not dealt with in the foregoing Articles of this Convention shall be taxable only in that State.
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, where an amount of income is paid to a resident of a Contracting State out of income received by trustees or personal representatives administering the estates of deceased persons and those trustees or personal representatives are residents of the other Contracting State, that amount shall be treated as arising from the same sources, and in the same proportions, as the income received by the trustees or personal representatives out of which that amount is paid.
Any tax paid by the trustees or personal representatives in respect of the income paid to the beneficiary shall be treated as if it had been paid by the beneficiary.
3.  The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to income, other than income from immovable property as defined in paragraph 2 of Article 6, if the beneficial owner of such income, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein and the right or property in respect of which the income is paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment. In such case the provisions of Article 7 shall apply.
4.  Where, by reason of a special relationship between the resident referred to in paragraph 1 and some other person, or between both of them and some third person, the amount of the income referred to in that paragraph exceeds the amount (if any) which would have been agreed upon between them in the absence of such a relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such a case, the excess part of the income shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the other applicable provisions of this Convention.
ARTICLE 22
Elimination of double taxation
1.  Where a resident of San Marino derives income or gains which may be taxed in the United Kingdom in accordance with the provisions of this Convention (except to the extent that these provisions allow taxation by the United Kingdom solely because the income is also income derived by a resident of the United Kingdom), San Marino shall allow as a deduction from the tax on the income of that resident, an amount equal to the income tax or capital gains tax paid in the United Kingdom. Such deduction in either case shall not, however, exceed that part of the income tax, as computed before the deduction is given, which is attributable, as the case may be, to the income which may be taxed in the United Kingdom.
2.  Subject to the provisions of the law of the United Kingdom regarding the allowance as a credit against United Kingdom tax of tax payable in a territory outside the United Kingdom or, as the case may be, regarding the exemption from United Kingdom tax of a dividend arising in a territory outside the United Kingdom or of the profits of a permanent establishment situated in a territory outside the United Kingdom (which shall not affect the general principle hereof):
(a)
San Marino tax payable under the laws of San Marino and in accordance with this Convention, whether directly or by deduction, on profits, income or chargeable gains from sources within San Marino (excluding in the case of a dividend tax payable in respect of the profits out of which the dividend is paid) shall be allowed as a credit against any United Kingdom tax computed by reference to the same profits, income or chargeable gains by reference to which San Marino tax is computed;
(b)
a dividend which is paid by a company which is a resident of San Marino to a company which is a resident of the United Kingdom shall be exempted from United Kingdom tax when the exemption is applicable and the conditions for exemption under the law of the United Kingdom are met;
(c)
the profits of a permanent establishment in San Marino of a company which is a resident of the United Kingdom shall be exempted from United Kingdom tax when the exemption is applicable and the conditions for exemption under the law of the United Kingdom are met;
(d)
in the case of a dividend not exempted from tax under sub-paragraph b) above which is paid by a company which is a resident of San Marino to a company which is a resident of the United Kingdom and which controls directly or indirectly at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company paying the dividend, the credit mentioned in sub-paragraph a) above shall also take into account San Marino tax payable by the company in respect of its profits out of which such dividend is paid.
For the purposes of this paragraph, profits, income and gains owned by a resident of the United Kingdom which may be taxed in San Marino in accordance with this Convention shall be deemed to arise from sources in San Marino.
3.  The provisions of paragraph 2 shall not apply where San Marino tax payable is in accordance with the provisions of this Convention solely because the income, profits or chargeable gains referred to in that paragraph is also income derived by a resident of San Marino.
4.  Where in accordance with any provision of the Convention income derived by a resident of a Contracting State is exempt from tax in that State, such State may nevertheless, in calculating the amount of tax on the remaining income of such resident, take into account the exempted income.
ARTICLE 23
Non-discrimination
1.  Nationals of a Contracting State shall not be subjected in the other Contracting State to any taxation or any requirement connected therewith, which is other or more burdensome than the taxation and connected requirements to which nationals of that other State in the same circumstances, in particular with respect to residence, are or may be subjected.
2.  The taxation on a permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting State has in the other Contracting State shall not be less favourably levied in that other State than the taxation levied on enterprises of that other State carrying on the same activities.
3.  Except where the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 9, paragraph 6 of Article 11, paragraph 4 of Article 12 or paragraph 4 of Article 21 apply, interest, royalties and other disbursements paid by an enterprise of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State shall, for the purpose of determining the taxable profits of such enterprise, be deductible under the same conditions as if they had been paid to a resident of the first-mentioned State.
4.  Enterprises of a Contracting State, the capital of which is wholly or partly owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by one or more residents of the other Contracting State, shall not be subjected in the first-mentioned State to any taxation or any requirement connected therewith which is other or more burdensome than the taxation and connected requirements to which other similar enterprises of the first-mentioned State are or may be subjected.
5.  Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as obliging either Contracting State to grant to individuals not resident in that State any of the personal allowances, reliefs and reductions for tax purposes which are granted to individuals so resident or to its nationals.
ARTICLE 24
Mutual agreement procedure
1.  Where a person considers that the actions of one or both of the Contracting States result or will result for him in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, he may, irrespective of the remedies provided by the domestic law of those States, present his case to the competent authority of either Contracting State. The case must be presented within three years from the first notification of the action resulting in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of the Convention.
2.  The competent authority shall endeavour, if the objection appears to it to be justified and if it is not itself able to arrive at a satisfactory solution, to resolve the case by mutual agreement with the competent authority of the other Contracting State, with a view to the avoidance of taxation which is not in accordance with the Convention. Any agreement reached shall be implemented notwithstanding any time limits in the domestic law of the Contracting States.
3.  The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall endeavour to resolve by mutual agreement any difficulties or doubts arising as to the interpretation or application of the Convention. They may also consult together for the elimination of double taxation in cases not provided for in the Convention.
4.  The competent authorities of the Contracting States may communicate with each other directly for the purpose of reaching an agreement in the sense of the preceding paragraphs.
5.  Where,
(a)
under paragraph 1, a person has presented a case to the competent authority of a Contracting State on the basis that the actions of one or both of the Contracting States have resulted for that person in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, and
(b)
the competent authorities are unable to reach an agreement to resolve that case pursuant to paragraph 2 within two years from the date when all the information required by the competent authorities in order to address the case has been provided to both competent authorities,
any unresolved issues arising from the case shall be submitted to arbitration if the person so requests in writing. These unresolved issues shall not, however, be submitted to arbitration if a decision on these issues has already been rendered by a court or administrative tribunal of either State. Unless a person directly affected by the case does not accept the mutual agreement that implements the arbitration decision, that decision shall be binding on both Contracting States and shall be implemented notwithstanding any time limits in the domestic laws of these States. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall by mutual agreement settle the mode of application of this paragraph.
ARTICLE 25
Exchange of information
1.  The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall exchange such information as is foreseeably relevant for carrying out the provisions of this Convention or to the administration or enforcement of the domestic laws concerning taxes of every kind and description imposed on behalf of the Contracting States, or of their political subdivisions or local authorities, insofar as the taxation thereunder is not contrary to the Convention. The exchange of information is not restricted by Articles 1 and 2.
2.  Any information received under paragraph 1 by a Contracting State shall be treated as secret in the same manner as information obtained under the domestic laws of that State and shall be disclosed only to persons or authorities (including courts and administrative bodies) concerned with the assessment or collection of, the enforcement or prosecution in respect of, the determination of appeals in relation to, the taxes referred to in paragraph 1, or the oversight of the above. Such persons or authorities shall use the information only for such purposes. They may disclose the information in public court proceedings or in judicial decisions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, information received by a Contracting State may be used for other purposes when such information may be used for such other purposes under the laws of both States and the competent authority of the supplying State authorises such use.
3.  In no case shall the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 be construed so as to impose on a Contracting State the obligation:
(a)
to carry out administrative measures at variance with the laws and administrative practice of that or of the other Contracting State;
(b)
to supply information which is not obtainable under the laws or in the normal course of the administration of that or of the other Contracting State;
(c)
to supply information which would disclose any trade, business, industrial, commercial or professional secret or trade process, or information the disclosure of which would be contrary to public policy (ordre public).
4.  If information is requested by a Contracting State in accordance with this Article, the other Contracting State shall use its information gathering measures to obtain the requested information, even though that other State may not need such information for its own tax purposes. The obligation contained in the preceding sentence is subject to the limitations of paragraph 3 but in no case shall such limitations be construed to permit a Contracting State to decline to supply information solely because it has no domestic interest in such information.
5.  In no case shall the provisions of paragraph 3 be construed to permit a Contracting State to decline to supply information solely because the information is held by a bank, other financial institution, nominee or person acting in an agency or a fiduciary capacity or because it relates to ownership interests in a person.
ARTICLE 26
Members of diplomatic missions
and consular posts
Nothing in this Convention shall affect the fiscal privileges of members of diplomatic missions or consular posts under the general rules of international law or under the provisions of special agreements.
ARTICLE 27
Entitlement to benefits
1.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Convention, a benefit under this Convention shall not be granted in respect of an item of income or a capital gain if it is reasonable to conclude, having regard to all relevant facts and circumstances, that obtaining that benefit was one of the principal purposes of any arrangement or transaction that resulted directly or indirectly in that benefit, unless it is established that granting that benefit in these circumstances would be in accordance with the object and purpose of the relevant provisions of this Convention.
2.  Where a benefit under this Convention is denied to a person under paragraph 1, the competent authority of the Contracting State that would otherwise have granted this benefit shall nevertheless treat that person as being entitled to this benefit, or to different benefits with respect to a specific item of income or a capital gain, if such competent authority, upon request from that person and after consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, determines that such benefits would have been granted to that person in the absence of the transaction or arrangement referred to in paragraph 1. The competent authority of the Contracting State to which the request has been made will consult with the competent authority of the other State before rejecting a request made under this paragraph by a resident of that other State.
ARTICLE 28
Entry into force
Each of the Contracting States shall notify the other, through diplomatic channels, of the completion of the procedures required by its law for the bringing into force of this Convention. This Convention shall enter into force on the date of the later of these notifications and shall thereupon have effect:
(a)
in San Marino:
(i)
in respect of taxes withheld at source, to the amounts collected as from 1 January of the calendar year next following that in which this Convention enters into force; and
(ii)
with respect to the other taxes on income, to the taxes referred to taxable periods as from 1 January of the calendar year next following that in which this Convention enters into force; and
(b)
in the United Kingdom:
(i)
in respect of taxes withheld at source, for amounts paid or credited on or after the first day of the second month next following the date on which this Convention enters into force;
(ii)
in respect of income tax and capital gains tax, for any year of assessment beginning on or after 6th April next following the date on which this Convention enters into force;
(iii)
in respect of corporation tax, for any financial year beginning on or after 1st April next following the date on which this Convention enters into force.
ARTICLE 29
Termination
This Convention shall remain in force until terminated by one of the Contracting States. Either Contracting State may terminate this Convention, through diplomatic channels, by giving notice of termination at least six months before the end of any calendar year beginning after the expiry of five years from the date of entry into force of this Convention. In such event, this Convention shall cease to have effect:
(a)
in San Marino:
(i)
in respect of taxes withheld at source, to the amounts collected as from 1 January of the calendar year next following that in which the notification of termination is given; and
(ii)
with respect to the other taxes on income, to the taxes referred to taxable periods as from 1 January of the calendar year next following that in which the notification of termination is given; and
(b)
in the United Kingdom:
(i)
in respect of taxes withheld at source, for amounts paid or credited after the date that is six months after the date on which notice of termination was given;
(ii)
in respect of income tax and capital gains tax, for any year of assessment beginning on or after 6th April next following the date on which the notice is given;
(iii)
in respect of corporation tax, for any financial year beginning on or after 1st April next following the date on which the notice is given.
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorised to this end, have signed this Convention.
Done in duplicate at London this 17th day of May 2023 in the English and Italian languages, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: For the Government of the Republic of San Marino:
Victoria Atkins Dr Luca Beccari
PROTOCOL
At the moment of the signature of the Convention between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Republic of San Marino for the Elimination of Double Taxation with Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital and the Prevention of Tax Evasion and Avoidance, the undersigned, duly authorised thereto, have agreed upon the following provisions which constitute an integral part of the Convention.
1.  With reference to Article 5
It is understood that, notwithstanding the UK’s observation on the Commentary (at paragraph 176 as it read on 21 November 2017), for the purposes of this Convention the term “permanent establishment” may also encompass a server in accordance with the Commentary on the OECD model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital.
2.  With reference to Article 8
It is understood that both Contracting States will apply the OECD model Commentary on International Shipping and Air Transport, in particular in relation to the treatment of profits from the rental, on a bareboat basis, of ships and aircraft and profits from the use, maintenance or rental of containers used for the transport of good or merchandise.
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorised to this end, have signed this Protocol.
Done in duplicate at London this 17th day of May 2023 in the English and Italian languages, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: For the Government of the Republic of San Marino:
Victoria Atkins Dr Luca BeccariEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
The Schedule to this Order contains a Convention and Protocol (“the Arrangements”) between the United Kingdom and the Republic of San Marino in relation to the elimination of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and on capital, the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance, and assisting international tax enforcement. This Order brings the Arrangements into effect.
The Arrangements aim to eliminate the double taxation of income and gains arising in one country and paid to residents of the other country. This is done by allocating the taxing rights that each country has under its domestic law over the same income and gains, and by providing relief from double taxation. There are also specific measures which combat discriminatory tax treatment and provide for assistance in international tax enforcement.
In this Order, article 1 provides for citation and article 2 makes a declaration as to the effect and content of the Arrangements.
The Arrangements will enter into force on the date of the later of the notifications by each country of the completion of its legislative procedures and will take effect in each territory in accordance with Article 28 of the Convention.
The date of entry into force will, in due course, be published in the London, Edinburgh and BelfastGazettes.
A Tax Information and Impact Note has not been produced for the Order as it gives effect to a double taxation agreement. Double taxation agreements impose no obligations on taxpayers, rather they seek to eliminate double taxation and fiscal evasion.