STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 23
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Malvern Hills (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
11th January 2023
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2)(“the Commission”) published a report dated September 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of Malvern Hills. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/malvern-hills.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Malvern Hills (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29) and section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map “Map referred to in the Malvern Hills (Electoral Changes) Order 2023”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0TL. it is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/malvern-hills..Wards of the district of Malvern Hills and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Malvern Hills are abolished.
(2) The district of Malvern Hills is divided into the 18 wards listed in column 1 of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in column 2 of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parish of Malvern and number of parish councillors
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of Malvern are abolished.
(2) The parish of Malvern is divided into the 9 parish wards listed in column 1 of the table in Schedule 2.
(3) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in column 2 of the table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
11th January 2023Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of Malvern Hills and number of councillors
1. Names of wards 2. Number of councillors
Alfrick, Leigh & Rushwick 2
Baldwin 2
Barnards Green 3
Broadheath 1
Castlemorton, Welland & Wells 2
Great Malvern 2
Hallow & Holt 1
Kempsey 2
Lindridge 1
Link 3
Longdon 1
Martley 1
Pickersleigh 1
Powick & the Hanleys 2
Tenbury 2
Upper Howsell 1
Upton & Ripple 2
West 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards of Malvern and number of councillors
1. Names of parish wards 2. Number of parish councillors
Chase 4
Great Malvern 3
Link 4
Lygon 1
Pickersleigh 2
Pound Bank 1
St Joseph’s 1
Upper Howsell 2
West 2EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Malvern Hills following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Malvern Hills and replaces them with 18 new ones listed in Schedule 1 for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes electoral changes in the parish of Malvern. These changes to parish wards come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2023. Article 4 gives effect to Schedule 2, which contains the names and number of councillors for the new parish wards.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0TL. The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/malvern-hills.
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private, public or voluntary sectors is foreseen.