Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 0000
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The North Hertfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
***
Coming into force in accordance article 1(2), (3), (4) and (5)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated May 2023(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of North Hertfordshire. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-hertfordshire.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the North Hertfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Article 3 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2024.
(4) Article 4 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2025;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2026.
(5) Article 5 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2026;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2027.
(6) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the North Hertfordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2023”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-hertfordshire.Wards of the district of North Hertfordshire and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of North Hertfordshire are abolished.
(2) The district of North Hertfordshire is divided into the 25 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parish of Royston and number of councillors
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parish of Royston are abolished.
(2) The parish of Royston is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of table 1 in Schedule 2.Parish wards of the parish of Bygrave and number of councillors
5.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parish of Bygrave are abolished.
(2) The parish of Bygrave is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(3) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of table 2 in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of North Hertfordshire and number of councillors
Name of ward Number of councillors
Arbury 1
Baldock East 2
Baldock West 3
Cadwell 1
Codicote & Kimpton 2
Ermine 1
Graveley, St Ippolyts & Wymondley 2
Great Ashby 2
Hitchin Bearton 3
Hitchin Highbury 2
Hitchin Oughton 2
Hitchin Priory 2
Hitchin Walsworth 3
Hitchwood 1
Knebworth 2
Letchworth Grange 2
Letchworth Norton 2
Letchworth South East 3
Letchworth South West 3
Letchworth Wilbury 2
Offa 2
Royston Heath 2
Royston Meridian 3
Royston Palace 2
Weston & Sandon 1Articles 4 and 5
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and numbers of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Royston and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Royston Garden Lane 1
Royston Meridian 5
Royston Palace 4
Royston South 1
Royston West 3
Royston Willowside 1
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Bygrave and number of councillors
Name of parish ward Number of councillors
Bygrave East 4
Bygrave West 1EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of North Hertfordshire following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of North Hertfordshire and replaces them with 25 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes electoral changes in the parish of Royston. These changes to parish wards come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2026. Table 1 of Schedule 2 contains the names of the new parish wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 5 makes electoral changes in the parish of Bygrave. These changes to parish wards come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2027. Table 2 of Schedule 2 contains the names of the new parish wards and the number of councillors for each.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-hertfordshire.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.