Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2018 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The East Hampshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2018
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated April 2018 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of East Hampshire. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the East Hampshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2018.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors(1) in 2019.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37 of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50) and section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the East Hampshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2018”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 14th floor, Millbank Tower, London, SW1P 4QP. It is also accessible online at http://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/hampshire/east-hampshireWards of the district of East Hampshire and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of East Hampshire are abolished.
(2) The district of East Hampshire is divided into 31 wards as listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Alton, Horndean, Petersfield, Selborne and Whitehill
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Alton, Horndean, Petersfield, Selborne and Whitehill are abolished.
(2) The parish of Alton is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Horndean is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Petersfield is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Selborne is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Whitehill is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(8) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of wards and number of councillors
(1)
Name of district ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Alton Amery 1
Alton Ashdell 1
Alton Eastbrooke 1
Alton Holybourne 1
Alton Westbrooke 1
Alton Whitedown 1
Alton Wooteys 1
Bentworth & Froyle 1
Binsted, Bentley & Selborne 2
Bramshott & Liphook 3
Buriton & East Meon 1
Clanfield 2
Four Marks & Medstead 3
Froxfield, Sheet & Steep 1
Grayshott 1
Headley 2
Horndean Catherington 1
Horndean Downs 1
Horndean Kings & Blendworth 2
Horndean Murray 1
Lindford 1
Liss 2
Petersfield Bell Hill 1
Petersfield Causeway 1
Petersfield Heath 1
Petersfield St Peter’s 2
Ropley, Hawkley & Hangers 1
Rowlands Castle 1
Whitehill Chase 2
Whitehill Hogmoor & Greatham 2
Whitehill Pinewood 1Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Alton
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Amery 2
Ashdell 2
Eastbrooke 1
Holybourne 2
Westbrooke 2
Whitedown 2
Wooteys 2
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Horndean
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Catherington 3
Downs 3
Kings & Blendworth 6
Murray 3
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Petersfield
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Bell Hill 2
Causeway 2
Heath 2
Ramshill 3
Rother 1
St Peter’s 2
Table 4
Wards of the parish of Selborne
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Oakhanger 10
Blackmoor Edge 2
Table 5
Wards of the parish of Whitehill
(1)
Name of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Chase 7
Hogmoor 5
Pinewood 3EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of East Hampshire following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district of East Hampshire remains unchanged. The changes made by this Order apply in respect of local government elections held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in 2019.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of East Hampshire and replaces them with 31 new ones. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential to the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 14th floor, Millbank Tower, London SW1P 4QP. The map may also be accessed at http://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/hampshire/east-hampshire
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sectors is foreseen.