W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2022 No. 469 (W. 115) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A465 Trunk Road (Rhigos 
Roundabout, Rhondda Cynon Taff 
to Aberdulais Interchange, Neath 
Port Talbot) (Temporary Prohibition 
of Vehicles, Cyclists & Pedestrians) 
Order 2022 
Made 
22 April 2022 
Coming into force 
27 April 2022 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A465 
trunk road, are satisfied that traffic on specified lengths 
of the trunk road should be prohibited because of 
works proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1) and (4) 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this 
Order. 
Title and commencement 
1. The title of this Order is the A465 Trunk Road 
(Rhigos Roundabout, Rhondda Cynon Taff to 
Aberdulais 
Interchange, 
Neath 
Port 
Talbot) 
(Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles, Cyclists & 
Pedestrians) Order 2022 and this Order comes into 
force on 27 April 2022. 
Interpretation 
2.  In this Order— 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c. 27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c. 26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1.  By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c. 32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
 
2
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means any 
vehicle being used by the emergency services or in 
connection with the works giving rise to this 
Order; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A465 
Neath to Abergavenny trunk road;  
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent periods commencing at 20:00 hours on 
27 April 2022 and ending when the temporary 
traffic signs for each period of works are removed. 
Prohibitions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on the 
lengths of the trunk road specified in the Schedule to 
this Order. 
4. No person may, during the works period, ride any 
pedal cycle on the lengths of the trunk road specified 
in the Schedule to this Order. 
5. No pedestrian may, during the works period, 
proceed on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
the Schedule. 
Application 
6. The prohibitions in articles 3, 4 and 5 apply only 
during such times and to such extent as indicated by 
traffic signs. 
      
Duration of this Order 
7. The maximum duration for this Order is 18 
months. 
 
Signed on behalf of the Deputy Minister for Climate 
Change, acting under the authority of the Minister for 
Climate Change, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
 
Dated the                                    22 April 2022 
 
 
 
Nicci Hunter 
Business Team Leader 
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
 
1. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Rhigos Roundabout to the nosing of 
 
3
the 
westbound 
entry 
slip 
road 
at 
Glynneath 
Interchange.  
2. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the 
eastbound exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to its 
junction with the western side of Rhigos Roundabout. 
3. The entire lengths of the westbound and eastbound 
entry slip roads at Glynneath Interchange. 
4. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the western 
exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to its junction 
with the eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout. 
5. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout to the nosing 
of the eastbound entry slip road at Glynneath 
Interchange. 
6. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Cwmgwrach 
Roundabout to its junction with the eastern side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
7. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Resolven Roundabout to the nosing  of 
the westbound entry slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange.  
8. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road (including the eastbound entry slip road at 
Aberdulais Interchange) that extends from the nosing 
of the northbound exit slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange to its junction with the western side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
