This Statutory Instrument has been made in consequence of a defect in S.I. 2019/904 and is being issued free of charge to all known recipients of that Statutory Instrument.
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2019 No. 1260
HOUSING, ENGLAND
The Houses in Multiple Occupation (Specified Educational Establishments) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2019
Made
16th September 2019
Laid before Parliament
20th September 2019
Coming into force
14th October 2019
The Secretary of State makes the following regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by section 250(2) of, and paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 14 to, the Housing Act 2004(1).
(1)
2004 c. 34. The powers conferred by paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 14 to the Housing Act 2004 (“the Act”) are exercisable in England by the Secretary of State. For the definition of appropriate national authority see section 261(1) of the Act.Citation, commencement and application
1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Houses in Multiple Occupation (Specified Educational Establishments) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2019 and come into force on 14th October 2019.
(2) These Regulations apply in relation to England only.Amendment of the Houses in Multiple Occupation (Specified Educational Establishments) (England) Regulations 2019
2.  In the Schedule to the Houses in Multiple Occupation (Specified Educational Establishments) (England) Regulations 2019(1), at the appropriate places insert—
“Blackpool and the Fylde College”
“Chichester College”
“Christ’s College, University of Cambridge”
“Churchill College, University of Cambridge”
“Clare College, University of Cambridge”
“Clare Hall, University of Cambridge”
“Corpus Christi, University of Cambridge”
“Darwin College, University of Cambridge”
“Downing College, University of Cambridge”
“Emmanuel College, University of Cambridge”
“Fitzwilliam College, University of Cambridge”
“Foundation for International Education”
“Girton College, University of Cambridge”
“Gonville and Caius, University of Cambridge”
“Hartpury University and Hartpury College”
“Homerton College, University of Cambridge”
“Hughes Hall, University of Cambridge”
“Jesus College, University of Cambridge”
“King’s College, University of Cambridge”
“Leeds Beckett University”
“Loughborough College”
“Lucy Cavendish College, University of Cambridge”
“Magdalene College, University of Cambridge”
“Murray Edwards College, University of Cambridge”
“Newnham College, University of Cambridge”
“Nottingham Trent University”
“Pembroke College, University of Cambridge”
“Peterhouse, University of Cambridge”
“Queen’s College, University of Cambridge”
“Richmond and Hillcroft Adult and Community College”
“Robinson College, University of Cambridge”
“SCIO – Scholarship and Christianity in Oxford”
“Selwyn College, University of Cambridge”
“Sidney Sussex College, University of Cambridge”
“St Catharine’s College, University of Cambridge”
“St Edmund’s College, University of Cambridge”
“St John’s College, University of Cambridge”
“The Backstage Academy”
“The Royal Veterinary College”
“Trinity College, University of Cambridge”
“Trinity Hall, University of Cambridge”
“University of Bradford”
“University of Chichester”
“University of Greenwich”
“University of Hertfordshire”
“University of Leeds”
“University of the Arts”
“Warwickshire College”
“West Dean College”
“Wolfson College, University of Cambridge”
(1)
S.I. 2019/904.Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government
Luke Hall
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government
16th September 2019EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
This instrument corrects a defect in the Houses in Multiple Occupation (Specified Educational Establishments) (England) Regulations 2019 (S.I. 2019/904) (“the principal Regulations”) which came into force on 1st June 2019.
The Schedule to the principal Regulations listed the specified educational establishments which were exempt from the licensing regime set out in Part 2 of the Housing Act 2004. A number of educational establishments were omitted in error from that list.
Regulation 2 of this instrument corrects that defect by inserting the omitted educational establishments into the Schedule to the principal Regulations, it also lists two further educational establishments who have become eligible to be listed since the principal Regulations were made.
This instrument is issued free of charge to all known recipients of the defective instrument.
An impact assessment has not been provided for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sector is foreseen.