Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Tunbridge Wells (Electoral Changes) Order 2024
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2), (3) and (4)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated May 2023(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Tunbridge Wells. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/tunbridge-wells.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Tunbridge Wells (Electoral Changes) Order 2024.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purposes of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2024.
(4) Article 5 comes into force—
(a)
for the purposes of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2026.
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2027.
(5) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Tunbridge Wells (Electoral Changes) Order 2024, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/tunbridge-wells.Wards of the borough of Tunbridge Wells and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Tunbridge Wells are abolished.
(2) The borough of Tunbridge Wells is divided into the 14 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Elections of the borough of Tunbridge Wells
4.—(1) Elections of all councillors for each ward of the borough of Tunbridge Wells are to be held simultaneously on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024.
(2) The councillors holding office for any ward abolished by article 3(1) immediately before the fourth day after the ordinary day of election of councillors in 2024 are to retire on that fourth day, and the newly elected councillors are to come into office on that fourth day.
(3) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2024 each is to retire in accordance with the provision made in the table in Schedule 2.
(4) Of the councillors elected for a ward in 2024—
(a)
the first councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the smallest number of votes; and
(b)
the second councillor for each ward to retire is to be the councillor elected by the next smallest number of votes.
(5) In the case of an equality of votes between any persons elected which makes it uncertain which of them is to retire in any year, the person to retire in that year is to be determined by lot.
(6) If an election of councillors for any ward is not contested, the person to retire in each year is to be determined by lot.
(7) An election to replace a councillor who is to retire under paragraph (3) is to be held on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in the year in which the retirement is due to take place, and any newly elected councillor is to come into office on the fourth day after that day.
(8) Where, under this article, any question is to be determined by lot, the lot is to be drawn at the next practicable meeting of the council after the question has arisen and the drawing is to be conducted under the direction of the person presiding at the meeting.Parish wards of the parishes of Paddock Wood and Southborough and number of councillors
5.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Paddock Wood and Southborough are abolished.
(2) The parish of Paddock Wood is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 3.
(3) The parish of Southborough is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 3.
(4) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(5) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 3.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the borough of Tunbridge Wells and number of councillors
(1)
Name of borough ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Cranbrook, Sissinghurst & Frittenden 3
Culverden 3
Goudhurst, Lamberhurst & Horsmonden 3
Hawkhurst, Sandhurst & Benenden 3
High Brooms 1
Paddock Wood 3
Pantiles 3
Park 3
Pembury & Capel 3
Rusthall & Speldhurst 3
Sherwood 3
Southborough & Bidborough 3
St James’ 3
St John’s 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Retirement of councillors elected in 2024
(1) Name of borough ward (2) Number of councillors to retire in 2026 (3) Number of councillors to retire in 2027 (4) Number of councillors to retire in 2028
Cranbrook, Sissinghurst & Frittenden 1 1 1
Culverden 1 1 1
Goudhurst, Lamberhurst & Horsmonden 1 1 1
Hawkhurst, Sandhurst & Benenden 1 1 1
High Brooms 0 1 0
Paddock Wood 1 1 1
Pantiles 1 1 1
Park 1 1 1
Pembury & Capel 1 1 1
Rusthall & Speldhurst 1 1 1
Sherwood 1 1 1
Southborough & Bidborough 1 1 1
St James’ 1 1 1
St John’s 1 0 1Article 5
SCHEDULE 3
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Paddock Wood and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Paddock Wood East 7
Paddock Wood South 1
Paddock Wood West 5
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Southborough and number of councillors
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Southborough East 1
Southborough High Brooms 5
Southborough North 7
Southborough West 5EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the borough of Tunbridge Wells following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. This Order does not change the boundary of the borough itself.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Tunbridge Wells and replaces them with the 14 new ones listed in Schedule 1 for the purpose of elections to be held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2024. It also establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes provision for a whole borough council election in 2024. Subsequently, the council will revert to the existing system of election by thirds. That article also provides for the order of retirement of councillors in 2026, 2027 and 2028 and the election of their replacements.
Article 5 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential on the changes made by article 3. The changes to parish wards introduced by article 5 come into force for the purpose of parish elections in 2027 and in respect of subsequent parish elections.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at: https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/tunbridge-wells. A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.