STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. 1140
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The South Staffordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2022
Made
4th November 2022
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated March 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of South Staffordshire. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/staffordshire/south-staffordshireCitation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the South Staffordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2022.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the South Staffordshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2022”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/staffordshire/south-staffordshireWards of the district of South Staffordshire and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of South Staffordshire are abolished.
(2) The district of South Staffordshire is divided into the 20 wards listed in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parishes of Great Wyrley, Penkridge, Perton and Wombourne
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Great Wyrley, Penkridge, Perton and Wombourne are abolished.
(2) The parish of Great Wyrley is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Penkridge is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Perton is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Wombourne is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(7) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
4th November 2022Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of South Staffordshire and number of councillors
(1)
Names of wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Bilbrook 2
Brewood, Coven & Blymhill 3
Cheslyn Hay Village 3
Codsall 3
Essington 2
Featherstone, Sharehill & Saredon 2
Great Wyrley Landywood 2
Great Wyrley Town 2
Himley & Swindon 1
Huntington & Hatherton 2
Kinver & Enville 3
Lapley, Stretton & Wheaton Aston 1
Pattingham, Trysull, Bobbington & Lower Penn 2
Penkridge North & Acton Trussell 2
Penkridge South & Gailey 2
Perton East 1
Perton Lakeside 2
Perton Wrottesley 1
Wombourne North 3
Wombourne South 3Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Great Wyrley
(1)
Name of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Landywood 7
North 2
Town 5
West 1
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Penkridge
(1)
Name of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Gailey 1
Levedale 1
North East 5
South East 8
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of Perton
(1)
Name of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
East 4
Kingswood & Trescott 1
Lakeside 7
Wrottesley 3
Table 4
Parish wards of the parish of Wombourne
(1)
Name of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Wombourne North 8
Wombourne South 7EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of South Staffordshire following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of South Staffordshire and replaces them with 20 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/staffordshire/south-staffordshire.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.