S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2024 No. 534 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Leeds (Educational Endowments) (Startforth 
Morritt Church of England Primary School) Order 2024 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18th April 2024 
Coming into force - 
- 
19th April 2024 
 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Startforth Morritt Church of 
England Primary School in the County of Durham is or has been held in connection with the 
provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a Conveyance dated 14th July 1892 and made between (1) 
William Watson and (2) The Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish of Startforth. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £174, 822 being the net proceeds of sale of 
numbers 1 and 3 School Cottages and held on deposit at CCLA Investment Management Limited 
pursuant to a Charity Commission scheme dated 7th March 2001; (b) the school site and buildings 
erected thereon, which is registered as an asset of community value and subject to the Assets of 
Community Value (England) Regulations 2012(a); and (c) any income derived from those assets 
before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Leeds Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(b). 
Representations made on the proposed Order by persons interested have been taken into account. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(c). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 2012/2421 
(b) 1996 c. 56. 
(c) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Leeds (Educational Endowments) (Startforth 
Morritt Church of England Primary School) Order 2024 and comes into force on the day after the 
day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means a Conveyance dated 14th July 1892 and made between (1) William Watson 
and (2) The Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish of Startforth; 
“the Diocesan Board” means Leeds Diocesan Board of Finance; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed;  
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Startforth Morritt Church of 
England Primary School;  
“trust assets” means: 
(a) £174, 822 being the net proceeds of sale of numbers 1 and 3 School Cottages and held by 
the trustees on deposit at CCLA Investment Management Limited pursuant to a Charity 
Commission scheme dated 7th March 2001; 
(b) the school site and buildings erected thereon; and  
(c) any income derived from those assets (whether before or after the operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The trust assets held immediately before the operative date must be transferred to the 
Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be done by persons holding such 
funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4.—(1) The Diocesan Board is authorised, subject to the provisions of the Assets of Community 
Value (England) Regulations 2012, to sell the school site and buildings and must, until sale, let or 
otherwise manage such property according to the general law applicable to the management of 
property held on trust for chargeable purposes. 
(2) After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consultation 
5. The Diocesan Board must consult the Leeds Diocesan Board of Education with regard to the 
exercise of the powers and functions conferred on it by this Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c. 18). 
 
3
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
18th April 2024 
Department for Education 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4(2)  
 
 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the episcopal area of Ripon; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the relevant income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area;  
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the relevant trust assets for either of the purposes 
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
purposes referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
 
4
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints Leeds Diocesan Board of Finance as trustee of the foundation known as 
Startforth Morritt Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as to the use of 
that foundation.  
The Order provides for the trust assets to be held on the uniform statutory trusts as set out in the 
Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education 
Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, academy 
schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for the 
technology of the arts in the episcopal area of Ripon in the Diocese of Leeds. 
 
