W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 1481 (W. 383) 
 ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A4810 Steelworks Access 
Road (Queen’s Way), (Llanwern, 
Newport) (Temporary Speed Limits 
and Clearway) Order 2021 
Made 
  14 December 2021 
      Coming into force                16 December 2021 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the 
relevant length of the A4810 Steelworks Access Road 
(Queen’s Way), are satisfied that traffic on specified 
lengths of the access road should be prohibited and 
restricted by reason of the likelihood of danger to the 
public. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1) and (4) 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this 
Order. 
Title and commencement   
1. The title of this Order is the A4810 Steelworks 
Access Road (Queen’s Way), (Llanwern, Newport) 
(Temporary Speed Limits and Clearway) Order 2021 
and it comes into force on 16 December 2021. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“access road” (“ffordd fynediad”) means the 
A4810 Steelworks Access Road (Queen’s Way) as 
specified in the Schedules to this Order: 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c. 27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic   
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c. 26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1.  By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, and 
paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of Wales Act 
2006 (c. 32), these powers are now exercisable by the Welsh 
Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
 
2
“carriageway” (“cerbytffordd”) means that length 
of the access road which is intended for the 
passage of vehicular traffic but excludes a lay-by; 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
(a) any vehicle being used by the emergency 
services; and 
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in 
response, 
or 
for 
practice 
in  
responding, 
to 
a 
national 
security 
emergency by a person who has been 
trained in driving at high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person  in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“verge” (“llain ymyl”) means any part of the 
access road which is not a carriageway or lay-by; 
Prohibitions and restrictions 
3. No person may drive any motor vehicle at a speed 
exceeding 30 miles per hour on the length of the 
access road specified in Schedule 1 to this Order. 
4. No person may drive any motor vehicle at a speed 
exceeding 40 miles per hour on the lengths of the 
access road specified in Schedule 2 to this Order. 
5. No person may drive any motor vehicle at a speed 
exceeding 50 miles per hour on the lengths of the 
access road specified in Schedule 3 to this Order. 
6.  Except as provided by article 8, no person may 
cause or permit any vehicle to stop on the length of the 
access road specified in Schedule 4 to this Order 
except on the direction or with the permission of a 
police constable, police community support officer or 
civil enforcement officer. 
7. No person may cause or permit any vehicle to stop 
on any verge immediately adjacent to any part of the 
carriageway comprised in the lengths of the access 
road specified in Schedule 4 to this Order for the 
purpose of selling goods from that vehicle. 
 
3
Suspension 
8. Nothing in article 6 applies— 
(a) so as to prevent a vehicle waiting on any 
carriageway for so long as may be necessary 
to enable the vehicle to be used in connection 
with: 
(i) any building operation or demolition; 
(ii) the removal of any obstruction to traffic; 
(iii) the 
maintenance, 
improvement 
or 
reconstruction of the access road or the 
laying, erection, maintenance, alteration 
or repair in or near the access road of any 
sewer or of any main pipe or apparatus 
for the supply of gas, water or electricity 
or of any electronic communications 
apparatus as defined in paragraph 5 of 
Schedule 3A to the Communications Act 
2003(1). 
(b) to a vehicle being used for police, fire brigade 
or ambulance purposes; 
(c) to a vehicle being used in the service of a 
local authority in pursuance of statutory 
powers or duties; and 
(d) to a vehicle stopping when the person in 
control of it: 
(i) is required by law to stop; 
(ii) is obliged to stop in order to avoid an 
accident; or 
(iii) is 
prevented 
from 
proceeding 
by 
circumstances 
outside 
that 
person’s 
control.   
Application 
9.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 
3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 apply only during such times and to 
such extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
   (2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply to 
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
10. The maximum duration for this Order is 18    
months. 
 
Signed on behalf of the Deputy Minister for Climate 
Change, acting under the authority of the Minister for 
Climate Change, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
                                                                               
(1) 
2003 c. 21. Schedule 3A was inserted by paragraph 1 of 
Schedule 1 to the Digital Economy Act 2017 (c. 30).     
 
 
4
 
 
 
 
Nicci Hunter 
Business Team Leader  
Welsh Government 
14 December 2021 
 
 
 
Lengths of the Steelworks Access Road (Queen’s 
Way), Llanwern, Newport 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
 
30 MPH Speed Limit 
That length of the access road that commences from a 
point 28 metres east of the Longditch Roundabout 
perimeter to a point 206 metres east of the centre of the 
Glan Llyn signal controlled junction. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
 
40 MPH Speed Limit 
That length of the eastbound carriageway of the access 
road that commences from a point 206 metres east of 
the centre of the Glan Llyn signal controlled junction 
to a point 41 metres east of the centre of the Newport 
Galvanisers signal controlled junction. 
That length of the westbound carriageway of the 
access road that commences from a point 173 metres 
east of the centre of the Air Products side road access 
to a point 206 metres east of the centre of the Glan 
Llyn signal controlled junction. 
 
SCHEDULE 3  
 
50 MPH Speed Limit 
That length of the eastbound carriageway of the access 
road that commences from a point 41 metres east of 
the centre of the Newport Galvanisers signal controlled 
junction to a point 10 metres west of the centre of the 
North Row Junction. 
That length of the westbound carriageway of the 
access road that commences from a point 10 metres 
west of the North Row Junction to a point 173 metres 
east of the centre of the Air Products side road access. 
 
 
5
SCHEDULE 4 
 
Clearway 
That length of the access road that commences from a 
point 28 metres east of the Longditch Roundabout 
perimeter to a point 10 metres west of the North Row 
Junction, a total distance of 5 kilometres. 
