S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 1137 
CIVIL AVIATION 
The Air Navigation (Restriction of Flying) (Windsor Castle) 
(Restricted Area EG R156) Regulations 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
11th October 2021 
Coming into force - 
- 
27th January 2022 
The Secretary of State has decided that it is necessary in the public interest to restrict flying in the 
vicinity of Windsor Castle, Berkshire having regard to the security considerations associated with 
this location by reason of it being the residence of a member of the Royal Family. 
The Secretary of State makes the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by 
article 239 of the Air Navigation Order 2016(a). 
Citation and commencement 
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Air Navigation (Restriction of Flying) (Windsor 
Castle) (Restricted Area EG R156) Regulations 2021 and come into force on 27th January 2022. 
Restricted airspace 
2.—(1) Subject to paragraph (2), no aircraft is to fly below 2,500 feet above mean sea level 
within the area bounded by a circle having a radius of 1.25 nautical miles whose centre is at 
512902N 0003614W. 
(2) Regulation 2(1) does not apply to any aircraft— 
(a) making an approach to or departing from London Heathrow Airport whilst under the 
control of London Terminal Control, Swanwick or the air traffic control unit at London 
Heathrow Airport, 
(b) making an approach to or departing from Royal Air Force Northolt whilst under the 
control of the Royal Air Force (Unit) Swanwick or the air traffic control unit at Royal Air 
Force Northolt, 
(c) operated by or on behalf of— 
(i) a member of the Royal Family, 
(ii) the National Police Air Service, 
(iii) the Helicopter Emergency Services, 
(iv) the Maritime and Coastguard Agency for the purposes of a Search and Rescue 
operation, or 
(v) The Queen’s Helicopter Flight, 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 2016/765, to which there are amendments not relevant to these Regulations. 
 
2
(d) flying in accordance with an agreed exemption issued by or with the permission of the 
Metropolitan Police (Royalty and Special Protection), or 
(e) landing in the grounds of Windsor Great Park at the invitation of the Director of Royal 
Travel provided that Protective Security Operations (PSO) has been informed in advance 
of the intended flight or landing. 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport 
 
David J Best 
 
Grade 7 
11th October 2021 
Department for Transport 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Regulations) 
These Regulations impose restrictions on flying in the vicinity of Windsor Castle, Berkshire. In 
view of the need for security for the members of the Royal Family staying at or visiting Windsor 
Castle, and at the request of the security services, the Secretary of State considers that it is in the 
public interest to restrict flying in the vicinity of that location. 
In relation to the exemptions or permissions mentioned in regulation 2(2)(d), these may include 
long-term exemptions for national bodies or flying clubs or short-term individual permissions. The 
permission of the Metropolitan Police (Royalty and Special Protection) may be requested directly 
through the Windsor Castle Police Control Room on 01753 620047. 
Full details of this Statutory Instrument will be included in the United Kingdom Aeronautical 
Information Publication (AIP) and promulgated by Aeronautical Information Circular (AIC) and 
Notice to Aviation (NOTAM). The restricted area has been designated as EG R156 for the 
purpose of inclusion in the AIP and in related charts and documents. 
The point of contact in the Civil Aviation Authority is Mr C W Scott, Principal Airspace 
Regulator, Safety and Airspace Regulation Group, on telephone number 03301 382997. 
