W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 1225 (W. 308) 
EDUCATION, WALES 
The Diocese of Bangor 
(Educational Endowments) (Ysgol 
Llanddeusant) Order 2021 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints Bangor Diocesan Trust as 
trustee of the endowment of the educational foundation 
known as the Ysgol Llanddeusant School Foundation 
of Llanddeusant, Holyhead, LL65 4AD. 
It creates two separate trusts, called the School Fund 
and the Religious Education Fund, and divides the 
Foundation’s assets between them. 
The School Fund is established under the uniform 
statutory trusts as set out in the Schedule for the 
benefit of the Church in Wales voluntary and 
foundation schools in the Diocese. 
The Religious Education Fund is established for the 
purpose of providing religious education in accordance 
with the doctrines of the Church in Wales within the 
parish in which the school was situated. 
 
2
 
W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 1225 (W. 308) 
EDUCATION, WALES 
The Diocese of Bangor 
(Educational Endowments) (Ysgol 
Llanddeusant) Order 2021 
Made 
1 November 2021 
Coming into force 
1 December 2021 
The Endowment has been shown to the satisfaction of 
the Welsh Ministers to be or to have been held in 
connection with the provision of religious education in 
accordance with the tenets of the Church in Wales at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to 
be used for the purposes of such a voluntary school. 
An application for an Order making new provision for 
the use of the Endowment has been made to the Welsh 
Ministers by the Bangor Diocesan Board of Finance, 
which body appears to the Welsh Ministers to be the 
appropriate authority of the Church in Wales for that 
purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of 
persons interested to make representations has been 
given in accordance with the provisions of section 555 
of the Education Act 1996. 
No representations have been made on the proposed 
Order. 
The Foundation assets are £41,800 being the net 
proceeds of sale from 10 February 2017 of the 
premises of the former school comprised in the 
Founding deed, and also any income derived from 
those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
The Welsh Ministers in exercise of the powers 
conferred on the Secretary of State by sections 554 and 
 
3
556 of the Education Act 1996, and now vested in 
them(1) make the following Order: 
Title, commencement and application 
1.—(1) This Order is called the Diocese of Bangor 
(Educational Endowments) (Ysgol Llanddeusant) 
Order 2021 and comes into force on 1 December 2021. 
(2) This Order applies in relation to Wales. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order unless the context otherwise 
requires— 
“Article” (“Erthygl”) means an article in this 
Order; 
“the Diocese” (“yr Esgobaeth”) means the Diocese 
of Bangor and “the Diocesan Trust” (“yr 
Ymddiriedolaeth Esgobaethol”) is to be construed 
accordingly; 
“the Endowment” (“y Gwaddol”) means the 
endowment comprised in the Founding deed; 
“the Foundation” (“y Sefydliad”) means the 
educational 
foundation 
known 
as 
Ysgol 
Llanddeusant established by the Founding deed; 
“the Foundation assets” (“asedau’r Sefydliad”) 
means the assets currently representing the 
Endowment; 
“the Founding deed” (“y weithred Sefydlu”) means 
the deed made on 3 September 1847 between (1) 
James Williams, Rector of Llanddeusant and (2) 
the Bishop of Bangor, the Archdeacon of Bangor 
and the Rector of Llanddeusant; 
“foundation school” (“ysgol sefydledig”) has the 
same meaning as in the Schools Standards and 
Framework Act 1998(2); 
“paragraph” (“paragraff”) followed by a specified 
number in any Article refers to the paragraph of 
that number in that same Article; 
                                                                               
(1) 
1996 c. 56. Section 554(1) was substituted by paragraph 
168(2) of Schedule 30 to the School Standards and 
Framework Act 1998 (c. 15). Section 554(3)(a) was 
substituted by paragraph 168(3) of Schedule 30 to the School 
Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 554(3)(b) was 
amended by paragraph 168(3)(b) of Schedule 30 to the 
School Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 
556(2)(a) was amended by paragraph 169(a) of Schedule 30 
to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998. Section 
556(2)(b) was amended by paragraph 169(b) of Schedule 30 
to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998. The 
functions of the Secretary of State under sections 554 and 
556 of the Education Act 1996 were transferred to the 
National Assembly for Wales by the National Assembly for 
Wales (Transfer of Functions) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/672) 
and then to the Welsh Ministers by paragraph 30 of Schedule 
11 to the Government of Wales Act 2006 (c. 32). 
(2) 
1998 c. 31. 
 
4
“the Religious Education Fund” (“y Gronfa 
Addysg Grefyddol”) means the religious education 
fund established by Article 4(b); 
“the Schedule” (“yr Atodlen”) means the schedule 
to this Order; 
“the School Fund” (“Cronfa’r Ysgol”) means the 
school fund established by Article 4(a); and 
“voluntary school” (“ysgol wirfoddol”) has the 
same meaning as in the School Standards and 
Framework Act 1998. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) This Order appoints the Diocesan Trust to be 
Trustee of— 
(a) the Foundation, 
(b) the Foundation assets, 
(c) the School Fund, and 
(d) the Religious Education Fund. 
(2) All funds which immediately before the date of 
this Order belong to or are held in trust for the 
Foundation, (other than any funds already held by the 
Diocesan Trust) are to be transferred to the Diocesan 
Trust, and all acts necessary for that purpose are to be 
done by any person holding such funds. 
Division of Assets 
4. The Foundation assets are to be divided into two 
separate trust funds namely— 
(a) the School Fund comprising 11/14ths of the 
Foundation assets, and 
(b) the Religious Education Fund comprising 
3/14ths of the Foundation assets. 
Administration of Foundation 
5.—(1) After 
payment 
of 
any 
expenses 
of 
administration, the Diocesan Trust must account for 
that proportion of the capital and income of the 
Foundation assets which represents the Religious 
Education Fund to the Vicar, or Rector, and 
Churchwardens of the parish for which the Foundation 
was established to provide religious education. 
(2) Each Vicar, or Rector, and Churchwardens to 
whom payment is made in accordance with the 
provisions of the preceding paragraph are to be 
constituted as trustees of the Religious Education Fund 
and may retain the capital of the Fund and may apply 
the accruing income thereof, or may apply the capital 
thereof, towards educational purposes related to the 
said parish in connection with the provision of 
religious education in accordance with the tenets of the 
 
5
Church in Wales by means of a Sunday School or 
otherwise. 
(3) The Diocesan Trust is to hold the School Fund 
on the uniform statutory trusts for the benefit of 
Church in Wales voluntary or foundation schools 
within the Diocese. 
(4) In this Article “uniform statutory trusts” means 
the trusts set out in the Schedule (being the uniform 
statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education 
Act 1996 as they apply in relation to the School Fund). 
Consolidation 
6. The School Fund may be consolidated with any 
existing endowment held for the purposes specified in 
the Schedule. 
 
 
Jeremy Miles 
Minister for Education and Welsh Language, one of 
the Welsh Ministers 
1 November 2021
6 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 5 
1. The Diocesan Trust may, after payment of any 
expenses 
incurred 
in 
connection 
with 
the 
administration of the School Fund, apply the capital 
and income of the School Fund for any of the 
following purposes: 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the 
erection, improvement or enlargement of, the 
premises of any relevant school in the 
Diocese; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in 
the Diocese; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the 
erection, improvement or enlargement of, the 
premises of a teacher’s house for use in 
connection with any relevant school in the 
Diocese; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for 
use in connection with any relevant school in 
the Diocese. 
2. The Diocesan Trust may also, after payment of 
any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the School Fund, apply the income of 
the School Fund for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, 
guidance and resources (including materials) 
in connection with any matter related to the 
management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the Diocese; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out 
of any inspection of any relevant school in the 
Diocese required by Part 1 of the Education 
Act 2005(1); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging 
staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the School 
Fund for either of the purposes referred 
to in sub-paragraph (a) and (b) above; 
(ii) the application of capital or income of 
the School Fund for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 1 above. 
3. “Relevant school” means a school of the type 
referred to in Article 5(3). 
                                                                               
(1) 
2005 c. 18. 
