STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 165
ANIMALS, ENGLAND
ANIMAL HEALTH
The Zoonoses (Amendment) (England) Order 2021
Made
18th February 2021
Coming into force
22nd February 2021
The Secretary of State makes this Order in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 1, 7(1), and (2), 8(1), 17(1), 23, 29 and 72 of the Animal Health Act 1981(1):
(1)
1981 c. 22.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Zoonoses (Amendment) (England) Order 2021 and comes into force on 22nd February 2021.
(2) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.Amendment of the Zoonoses Order 1989
2.  The Zoonoses Order 1989(1) is amended as follows.
(1)
S.I. 1989/285, amended by S.I 2011/2883 .Amendment to article 4
3.—(1) In article 4—
(a)
in paragraph (1)—
(i)
for “animals and poultry” substitute “when carried in a relevant host”;
(ii)
in sub-paragraph (a), omit “and”;
(iii)
after sub-paragraph (b), insert—
“(c)
Coxiella burnetii;
(d)
severe acute respiratory coronavirus syndrome 2 (SARS-CoV-2).”;
(b)
After paragraph 2, insert—
“3.  In this article “relevant host” means—
(a)
in the case of organisms mentioned in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), any animal or poultry;
(b)
in the case of the organism mentioned in sub-paragraph (c), any cattle, sheep, camelids and goats;
(c)
in the case of the organism mentioned in sub-paragraph (d), any mammal.”.Amendment to Article 8
4.  In article 8—
(a)
in paragraph (1), for “a designated organism” substitute “an organism designated by article 4(1)(a) or (b)”;
(b)
in paragraph (5), for sub-paragraph (a) substitute “animal” means cattle (including water buffalo and bison), horse, deer, sheep, goat, pig, rabbit or dog.”.Amendment to Article 8
5.  After article 8, insert—
“8ZA Reporting of presence of an organism designated by article 4(1)(c) or 4(1)(d)
8ZA.—(1) Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4) below, where the presence or former presence of an organism designated by article 4(1)(c) or (d) is identified in a sample taken from a mammal or the carcase of a mammal, by a laboratory examination or by a serological or other examination carried out elsewhere than at a laboratory, the person in charge of the laboratory, or, in the case of an examination carried out elsewhere than at a laboratory, the person carrying out such examination shall forthwith make to a veterinary officer of the Minister a written or oral report containing the particulars specified in Schedule 2 to this Order.
(2) A person who is under an obligation to make a report under paragraph (1) above must, if so required by an officer of the appropriate Minister, supply that officer with a culture or diagnostic material of the designated organism in respect of which that obligation arose.
(3) Nothing in paragraph (1) requires a person to make a report where his knowledge or suspicion of the presence of a designated organism results from an identification made by or on behalf of, the appropriate Minister.
(4) For the purposes of this article—
(a)
“research establishment” means an establishment carrying out research into a designated organism;
(b)
“veterinary officer of the Minister” means an officer of the Minister who is a person registered in the register of veterinary surgeons or in the supplementary veterinary register.”.Amendment to article 8A
6.  In article 8A—
(a)
in paragraph (1), for “carcass”, substitute “carcase of an animal”;
(b)
after paragraph (2), insert—
“(2A) The particulars of which notice must be given are—
(a)
the species of animal in which (or in the carcase of which) the organism is, or is suspected to be, or have been present;
(b)
the name of the owner or keeper of the animal;
(c)
the address of the premises at which the animal (or carcase of the animal) is present;
(d)
the name and address of the person by whom the notice is given;
(e)
the date on which notice is given.
(2B) Notice given under this article must be signed by the person providing the information under 2A.”;
(c)
for paragraph (3) substitute—
“(3) For the purposes of this article, “animal” means any kind of mammal, except man.”.Amendment to article 8A
7.  In Schedule 2, after paragraph 2, insert—
“2A.  The name and address of the keeper or owner of the animal or carcase of an animal within which the designated organism is isolated, or previous presence detected.”.Gardiner of Kimble
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State,
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
18th February 2021EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order is made in exercise of powers conferred by the Animal Health Act 1981 (c. 22) in particular, section 29 of that Act. It applies in relation to England only.
The Order amends the Zoonoses Order 1989 (S.I 1989/285) (“the Zoonoses Order”) for the following purposes—
(a)
to add additional zoonotic diseases (Coxiella burnetii and SARS-CoV-2) to the list of organisms designated under section 29 of that Act (organisms to which the specified provisions of the Act apply) (article 3);
(b)
to apply the requirement to report findings of organisms of the genus salmonella and brucella found in samples taken from animals in relation to samples taken from dogs (article 4);
(c)
to prescribe the particulars of the reporting requirement in relation to Coxiella burnetii and SARS-CoV-2 (article 5)-;
(d)
to prescribe the particulars to be included in a signed report in relation to Echinococcus multilocularis under article 8A of the Zoonoses Order (article 6).
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private or voluntary sector is foreseen.