S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 593 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of York (Educational Endowments) (Ingleby 
Arncliffe Church of England Primary School) Order 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
19th May 2021 
Coming into force - 
- 
20th May 2021 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Ingleby Arncliffe Church of 
England Primary School, in the Diocese of York, is or has been held in connection with the 
provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 23rd August 1977 and made between (1) the Council 
of the County of North Yorkshire and (2) the York Diocesan Board of Finance Limited. 
The assets representing the said endowment of the foundation consist of the school site and 
buildings erected thereon, including any income derived therefrom whether before or after the 
coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the York Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to him to be 
the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of York (Educational Endowments) (Ingleby 
Arncliffe Church of England Primary School) Order 2021 and comes into force on the day after 
the day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56 
(b) Section 554 is amended by paragraph 168 of Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31) and 
section 556 is amended by paragraph 169 of that Schedule. 
 
2
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation dated 23rd August 1977 and made between (1) 
the Council of the County of North Yorkshire and (2) the York Diocesan Board of Finance 
Limited; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the York Diocesan Board of Finance Limited; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Ingleby Arncliffe Church of 
England Primary School; 
“trust assets” means the school site and buildings erected thereon, together with any income 
derived therefrom (whether before or after the operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date shall be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose shall be 
done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4.—(1) The Diocesan Board is authorised to sell the trust assets and must, until sale, let or 
otherwise manage such assets according to the general law applicable to the management of 
property held on trust for charitable purposes. 
(2) After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with York Diocesan Board of Education’s Uniform 
Statutory Trust Fund(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as York Diocesan Board of 
Education’s Uniform Statutory Trust Fund. 
Consultation 
6. The Diocesan Board must consult the York Diocesan Board of Education with regard to the 
exercise of the powers and functions conferred on it by this Order. 
 
 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
19th May 2021 
Department for Education 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c. 18). 
(b) York Diocesan Board’s Uniform Statutory Trust Fund’s trustee is the Diocesan Board. The assets of York Diocesan Board’s 
Uniform Statutory Trust Fund are held under the uniform statutory trusts. 
 
3
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4(2) 
The Uniform Statutory Trusts 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of York; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the York Diocesan Board of Finance Limited as trustee of the foundation 
known as Ingleby Arncliffe Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as to the 
use of the endowment of that foundation. 
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as York Diocesan 
Board of Education’s Uniform Statutory Trust Fund and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set 
out in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of York. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
