 
1
S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2022 No. 305 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Lincoln (Educational Endowments) (Saltfleetby 
Church of England Primary School) Order 2022 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15th March 2022 
Coming into force - 
- 
16th March 2022 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Saltfleetby Church of England 
Primary School, in the county of Lincolnshire, is or has been held in connection with the provision 
of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a voluntary 
school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 5th May 1849 and made between (1) the Reverend 
Frederic Pyndar Lowe, the Reverend Richard Garvey, the Reverend John Bond and Thomas 
Charles Oldham and (2) John Lord Bishop of Lincoln and the Reverend Henry Kaye Bonney.   
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £127,403 being the net proceeds of sale of 
the former school premises and teacher’s house and held on deposit at CCLA Investment 
Management Limited; and (b) any income derived from those proceeds of sale before the coming 
into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited, which body 
appears to the Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the 
purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998(c.31). 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Lincoln (Educational Endowments) (Saltfleetby 
Church of England Primary School) Order 2022 and comes into force on the day after the day on 
which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation being a deed dated 5th May 1849 and made 
between (1) the Reverend Frederic Pyndar Lowe, the Reverend Richard Garvey, the Reverend 
John Bond and Thomas Charles Oldham and (2) John Lord Bishop of Lincoln and the 
Reverend Henry Kaye Bonney; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed;  
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Saltfleetby Church of England 
Primary School;  
“trust assets” means the sum of £127,403 held on deposit at CCLA Investment Management 
Limited representing the net proceeds of sale of the former premises of Saltfleetby Church of 
England Primary School and teacher’s house, together with any income derived from those 
assets (whether before or after the operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4. After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996 (a)). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with the School Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated 
funds(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the School Buildings Section 86/2 
accumulated funds.  
 
 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
15th March 2022 
Department for Education 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005(c.18). 
 
3
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4  
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Lincoln; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area;  
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Lincoln Diocesan Trust and Board of Finance Limited as trustee of the 
foundation known as Saltfleetby Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as 
to the use of the endowment of that foundation. 
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as the School 
Buildings Section 86/2 accumulated funds and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set out in the 
Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education 
Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, academy 
schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for the 
technology of the arts in the Diocese of Lincoln. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
