STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. 1136
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Waverley (Electoral Changes) Order 2022
Made
4th November 2022
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated March 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Waverley. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/surrey/waverleyCitation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Waverley (Electoral Changes) Order 2022.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Waverley (Electoral Changes) Order 2022”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/surrey/waverleyWards of the borough of Waverley and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Waverley are abolished.
(2) The borough of Waverley is divided into the 24 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parishes of Farnham, Godalming and Haslemere and number of councillors
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Farnham, Godalming and Haslemere are abolished.
(2) The parish of Farnham is divided into the 11 parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Godalming is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Haslemere is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(6) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
4th November 2022Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the borough of Waverley and numbers of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Alfold, Dunsfold & Hascombe 2
Bramley & Wonersh 3
Chiddingfold 1
Cranleigh East 3
Cranleigh West 2
Elstead & Peper Harow 1
Ewhurst & Ellens Green 1
Farnham Bourne 2
Farnham Castle 2
Farnham Firgrove 2
Farnham Heath End 2
Farnham Moor Park 2
Farnham North West 2
Farnham Rowledge 2
Farnham Weybourne 2
Godalming Binscombe & Charterhouse 3
Godalming Central & Ockford 2
Godalming Farncombe & Catteshall 2
Godalming Holloway 2
Haslemere East 3
Haslemere West 2
Hindhead & Beacon Hill 2
Milford & Witley 3
Western Commons 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and numbers of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Farnham
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Badshot Lea 1
Bourne 2
Castle 3
Firgrove East 2
Firgrove West 1
Heath End 2
Hog Hatch 1
Moor Park 1
North West 1
Rowledge 2
Weybourne 2
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Godalming
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Binscombe 4
Central 2
Charterhouse 3
Croft 1
Farncombe & Catteshall 4
Holloway 4
Ockford 2
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of Haslemere
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Hindhead & Beacon Hill 4
North 4
Nutcombe 1
South 4
West 5EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the borough of Waverley following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the borough remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Waverley and replaces them with 24 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/surrey/waverley.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.