STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. 1123
ENERGY, NORTHERN IRELAND
The Energy Prices (Designated Domestic Price Reduction Schemes) (Northern Ireland) Regulations 2022
Made
at 12.15 p.m. on 3rd November 2022
Laid before Parliament
at 1.00 p.m. on 4th November 2022
Coming into force
5th November 2022
The Secretary of State makes these Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 6(1)(a) and 7(1)(a) of the Energy Prices Act 2022(1).
(1)
2022 c. 44.Citation, commencement, extent and interpretation
1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Energy Prices (Designated Domestic Price Reduction Schemes) (Northern Ireland) Regulations 2022 and come into force on the day after the day on which they are laid.
(2) These Regulations extend to Northern Ireland.
(3) In these Regulations, “the Act” means the Energy Prices Act 2022.Designation of a domestic electricity price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland
2.  The scheme document entitled “Energy Price Guarantee for Domestic Electricity Consumers in Northern Ireland” and dated 31st October 2022(1) (and any related arrangements), as they have effect from time to time, are designated as a domestic electricity price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland(2) for the purposes of section 6 of the Act.
(1)
A copy of the scheme document is available from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0ET and online at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-price-guarantee-scheme-documents.
(2)
The phrase “domestic electricity price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland” is defined in section 5(2) of the Energy Prices Act 2022.Designation of a domestic gas price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland
3.  The scheme document entitled “Energy Price Guarantee for Domestic Gas Consumers in Northern Ireland” and dated 31st October 2022(1) (and any related arrangements), as they have effect from time to time, are designated as a domestic gas price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland(2) for the purposes of section 7 of the Act.
(1)
A copy of the scheme document is available from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0ET and online at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-price-guarantee-scheme-documents.
(2)
The phrase “domestic gas price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland” is defined in section 5(4) of the Energy Prices Act 2022.Graham Stuart
Minister of State for Climate
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
At 12.15 p.m. on 3rd November 2022EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These regulations designate certain schemes under the Energy Prices Act 2022 (c. 44) (“the Act”). Regulation 2 designates a domestic electricity price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland for the purposes of section 6 of the Act. Regulation 3 designates a domestic gas price reduction scheme for Northern Ireland for the purposes of section 7 of the Act.
Domestic electricity and gas price reduction schemes reduce the amount charged for domestic electricity or gas supply by licensed suppliers and provide for the Secretary of State to make payments to those suppliers in respect of those reductions. The effect of designation is to impose on suppliers the obligations arising under sections 6 and 7 of the Act respectively (requiring them to apply to join the scheme and, when joined, to remain in and comply with it) and to enable regulatory enforcement of the terms of the schemes.
Copies of the scheme documents designated by regulations 2 and 3 are available from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0ET and online at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-price-guarantee-scheme-documents.
An impact assessment was produced for the Energy Prices Bill and is available from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0ET. A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sector is foreseen.