Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. [****]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Wychavon (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
***
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated September 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of Wychavon. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c.20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/wychavon.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Wychavon (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Wychavon (Electoral Changes) Order 2023”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/wychavon..Wards of the district of Wychavon and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Wychavon are abolished.
(2) The district of Wychavon is divided into the 27 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Parish wards of the parishes of Badsey & Aldington, Dodderhill, Droitwich Spa, Elmley Lovett, Evesham and South Lenches and number of councillors
4.—(1) The existing parish wards of the parishes of Badsey & Aldington, Dodderhill, Droitwich Spa, Elmley Lovett, Evesham and South Lenches are abolished.
(2) The parish of Badsey & Aldington is divided into the five parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Dodderhill is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Droitwich Spa is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Elmley Lovett is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Evesham is divided into the eight parish wards listed in the first column of Table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) The parish of South Lenches is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 6 in Schedule 2.
(8) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(9) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that parish ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of Wychavon and number of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Badsey & Aldington 1
Bengeworth 2
Bowbrook 1
Bredon 1
Bredon Hill 1
Bretforton & Offenham 1
Broadway, Sedgeberrow & Childswickham 2
Dodderhill 1
Drakes Broughton, Norton & Whittington 2
Droitwich East 2
Droitwich South East 2
Droitwich South West 2
Droitwich West 2
Eckington 1
Evesham North 2
Evesham South 2
Fladbury 1
Hampton 3
Hartlebury 1
Harvington & Norton 1
Honeybourne, Pebworth & The Littletons 2
Inkberrow 2
North Claines & Salwarpe 2
Ombersley 1
Pershore 3
Pinvin 1
Upton Snodsbury 1Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Badsey & Aldington(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Aldington Village 1
Badsey 9
Blackminster 1
Bowers Hill 1
Orchards 1
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Dodderhill
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Dodderhill 12
Impney 1
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of Droitwich Spa
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Droitwich Central 1
Droitwich Chawson 2
Droitwich Copcut 3
Droitwich East 4
Droitwich Tagwell 2
Droitwich West 4
Droitwich Witton 2
Table 4
Parish wards of the parish of Elmley Lovett
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Cutnall Green 4
Elmley Lovett 3
Table 5
Parish wards of the parish of Evesham
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Abbey 1
Bengeworth 5
Evesham Avon 2
Evesham South 5
Evesham Twyford 2
Fairfield 1
Great Hampton 3
Little Hampton 5
Table 6
Parish wards of the parish of South Lenches
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Church Lench 6
Sheriff’s Lench 1EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Wychavon following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Wychavon and replaces them with 27 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/west-midlands/worcestershire/wychavon.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.