SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No. 435
CHARITIES
The Charities (Disclosure of Information to Designated Bodies) (Scotland) Order 2020
Made
15th December 2020
Laid before the Scottish Parliament
17th December 2020
Coming into force
1st March 2021
The Scottish Ministers make the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by section 25(2)(a) of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005(1), and all other powers enabling them to do so.
(1)
2005 asp 10.Citation and commencement
1.  This Order may be cited as the Charities (Disclosure of Information to Designated Bodies) (Scotland) Order 2020 and comes into force on 1 March 2021.
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 1 in force at 1.3.2021, see art. 1Designated bodies
2.  The public bodies and office-holders listed in the schedule are designated for the purposes of section 25(1)(a) of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 (removal of restrictions on disclosure of certain information).
Commencement Information
I1
Art. 2 in force at 1.3.2021, see art. 1AILEEN CAMPBELL
A member of the Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House,
EdinburghArticle 2
SCHEDULE
Designated public bodies and office-holders
Commencement Information
I1
Sch. in force at 1.3.2021, see art. 1
Police forces
The chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland
The chief constable of the British Transport Police
The chief constable of the Civil Nuclear Constabulary
The Commissioner of Police for the City of London
The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis
The chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police
The chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland
The Provost Marshal of the Royal Navy Police
The Provost Marshal of the Royal Military Police
The Provost Marshal of the Royal Air Force Police
[F1The Provost Marshal for serious crime]
The chief constable of Avon and Somerset Constabulary
The chief constable of Bedfordshire Police
The chief constable of Cambridgeshire Constabulary
The chief constable of Cheshire Constabulary
The chief constable of Cleveland Police
The chief constable of Cumbria Constabulary
The chief constable of Derbyshire Constabulary
The chief constable of Devon and Cornwall Police
The chief constable of Dorset Police
The chief constable of Durham Constabulary
The chief constable of Dyfed-Powys Police
The chief constable of Essex Police
The chief constable of Gloucestershire Constabulary
The chief constable of Greater Manchester Police
The chief constable of Gwent Police
The chief constable of Hampshire Constabulary
The chief constable of Hertfordshire Constabulary
The chief constable of Humberside Police
The chief officer of the salaried Police Force of the Island of Guernsey
The chief constable of the Isle of Man Constabulary
The chief constable of Kent Police
The chief constable of Lancashire Constabulary
The chief constable of Leicestershire Police
The chief constable of Lincolnshire Police
The chief constable of Merseyside Police
The chief constable of Norfolk Constabulary
The chief constable of North Wales Police
The chief constable of North Yorkshire Police
The chief constable of Northamptonshire Police
The chief constable of Northumbria Police
The chief constable of Nottinghamshire Police
The chief constable of South Wales Police
The chief constable of South Yorkshire Police
The chief constable of Staffordshire Police
The chief officer of the States of Jersey Police
The chief constable of Suffolk Constabulary
The chief constable of Surrey Police
The chief constable of Sussex Police
The chief constable of Thames Valley Police
The chief constable of Warwickshire Police
The chief constable of West Mercia Constabulary
The chief constable of West Midlands Police
The chief constable of West Yorkshire Police
The chief constable of Wiltshire Police
Textual Amendments
F1
Words in sch. inserted (5.12.2022) by The Armed Forces (Tri-Service Serious Crime Unit) (Consequential Amendments) Regulations 2022 (S.I. 2022/1051), regs. 1(2), 20(2)
Prosecuting authorities
The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service
The Director of Public Prosecutions
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland
The Director of the Serious Fraud Office
Other public bodies and office holders
The Charity Commission for England and Wales
The Charity Commission for Northern Ireland
The Commission for Equality and Human Rights
The Financial Conduct Authority
Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
The Information Commissioner
The Director General of the National Crime Agency
The Scottish Housing Regulator
Social Care and Social Work Improvement ScotlandEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order designates public bodies and office-holders for the purposes of section 25(1)(a) of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 (“the Act”).
Section 24 of the Act permits the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator (“OSCR”) to disclose information to a public body or office-holder subject to any obligation as to secrecy or other restriction on disclosure. Section 25(1)(a) allows OSCR to disclose information which is subject to an obligation as to secrecy or other restriction on disclosure to a designated body for any purpose connected with the exercise of OSCR’s functions or for the purpose of enabling or assisting that body to exercise any functions.
The schedule of this Order lists the public bodies and office-holders which are designated (and become “designated bodies”) for the purpose of section 25(1)(a) of the Act.