 
 
S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2024 No. 201 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Salisbury (Educational Endowments) (the 
former Worton and Marston Church of England Primary School) 
Order 2024 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22nd February 2024 
Coming into force - 
- 
23rd February 2024 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Worton and Marston Church 
of England Primary School, in the county of Wiltshire, is or has been held in connection with the 
provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a conveyance dated 10th November 1859 and made between (1) 
James Few, (2) Roger Matthews and (3) Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish of Worton and 
Marston and a deed of assignment dated 7th February 1875 between (1) Roger Matthews and (2) 
Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish of Worton and Marston. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £311,469 being the net proceeds of sale of 
the former school premises and teacher’s house and held by the Salisbury Diocesan Board of 
Finance in a deposit account; and (b) any income derived from those proceeds of sale before the 
coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an Order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Salisbury Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Salisbury (Educational Endowments) (the former 
Worton and Marston Church of England Primary School) Order 2024 and comes into force on the 
day after the day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deeds” means the deed of the foundation being a conveyance dated 10th November 1859 
and made between (1) James Few, (2) Roger Matthews and (3) Minister and Churchwardens 
of the Parish of Worton and Marston and a deed of assignment dated 7th February 1875 
between (1) Roger Matthews and (2) Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish of Worton 
and Marston; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Salisbury Diocesan Board of Education; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deeds; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Worton and Marston Church of 
England Primary School; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £165,175 capital plus £146,294 income representing the net 
proceeds of sale of the former premises of Worton and Marston Church of England Primary 
School and teacher’s house, together with any income derived from those assets (whether 
before or after the operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4. After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with the Diocese of Salisbury Consolidated Educational 
Endowments(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the Diocese of Salisbury 
Consolidated Educational Endowments. 
 
 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
22nd February 2024 
Department for Education 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c.18). 
(b) The trustee of the Diocese of Salisbury Consolidated Educational Endowments is the Diocesan Board. The assets of the 
Diocese of Salisbury Consolidated Educational Endowments are held on the uniform statutory trusts. 
 
 
3
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4 
 
 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Salisbury; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Salisbury Diocesan Board of Education as trustee of the foundation 
known as Worton and Marston Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as to 
the use of the endowment of that foundation. 
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as the Diocese of 
Salisbury Consolidated Educational Endowments and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set 
out in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of Salisbury. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18 
