 
 
S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2024 No. 531 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of London (Educational Endowments) (St Matthias 
Church of England Primary School) Order 2024 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18th April 2024 
Coming into force - 
- 
19th April 2024 
 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as St Matthias Church of 
England Primary School in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets, is or has been held in 
connection with the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of 
England at a voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of 
such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a Conveyance dated 11 July 1872 and made between (1) Mary 
Towne Butcher, Louis Holt Butcher and Louis George Butcher as trustees of a Will Trust of 
Colonel James Edward Butcher and (2) The National Society. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of the school site and buildings erected thereon, 
including any income derived from those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the London Diocesan Board for Schools, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998(c.31). 
 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of London (Educational Endowments) (St Matthias 
Church of England Primary School) Order 2024 and comes into force on the day after the day on 
which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means a Conveyance dated 11 July 1872 and made between (1) Mary Towne 
Butcher, Louis Holt Butcher and Louis George Butcher as trustees of a Will Trust of Colonel 
James Edward Butcher and (2) The National Society; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the London Diocesan Board for Schools; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed;  
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as St Matthias Church of England 
Primary School;  
“trust assets” means the school site and buildings erected thereon, together with any income 
derived from those assets (whether before or after the operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The trust assets held immediately before the operative date must be transferred to the 
Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be done by persons holding such 
funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4.—(1) The Diocesan Board is authorised to sell the trust assets and must, until sale, let or 
otherwise manage such assets according to the general law applicable to the management of 
property held on trust for charitable purposes. 
(2) After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with the London Diocesan Board for School’s Uniform 
Statutory Trust Fund(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the London Diocesan Board 
for School’s Uniform Statutory Trust Fund. 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
18th April 2024 
Department for Education 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c.18). 
 
 
3
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4(2) 
 
 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of London; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area;  
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the London Diocesan Board for Schools as trustee of the foundation known as 
St Matthias Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as to the use of that 
foundation.  
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as London 
Diocesan Board for School’s Uniform Statutory Trust Fund and held on the uniform statutory 
trusts as set out in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 
36 to the Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation 
schools, academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city 
colleges for the technology of the arts in the Diocese of London. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
