Draft Regulations laid before the Scottish Parliament under section 27(12) of the Good Food Nation (Scotland) Act 2022, for approval by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
DRAFT SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No.
FOOD
The Scottish Food Commission (Appointment) Regulations 2024
Made
2024
Coming into force
21st April 2024
The Scottish Ministers make the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 13(2) of the schedule of the Good Food Nation (Scotland) Act 2022(1), and all other powers enabling them to do so.
In accordance with section 27(12) of that Act, a draft of this instrument has been laid before and approved by resolution of the Scottish Parliament.
(1)
2022 asp. 5.Citation, commencement and interpretation
1.  These Regulations may be cited as the Scottish Food Commission (Appointment) Regulations 2024 and come into force on 21 April 2024.Appointment as a chairing member or an ordinary member of the Scottish Food Commission
2.—(1) When making appointments of members of the Scottish Food Commission, the Scottish Ministers must have regard to the desirability of a board including a member who is representative of interests in one or more of the following—
(a)
the food business sector,
(b)
food-related third sector bodies.
(2) In paragraph (1)(b), “third sector body” means a body (whether or not formally constituted) established for purposes which consist of, or consist mainly of, providing benefits for society (but does not include a body established under an enactment).
(3) When making appointments of members of the Scottish Food Commission, the Scottish Ministers must have regard to the desirability of a board including a member who has expertise in or experience of food-related issues in relation to one or more of the following matters—
(a)
social and economic wellbeing,
(b)
the environment,
(c)
health and physical and mental wellbeing (including in particular through the provision of health and social care services),
(d)
economic development,
(e)
animal welfare,
(f)
education,
(g)
child poverty.Name
A member of the Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House,
Edinburgh
DateEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations set out criteria that the Scottish Ministers must have regard to when making appointments to the Scottish Food Commission. They provide that the Scottish Ministers must have regard to the desirability of a board including a member who is representative of interests in the food business sector or food-related third sector bodies. They also provide that the Scottish Ministers must have regard to the desirability of a board including a member who has expertise in or experience of food-related issues in relation to relevant matters.