This Statutory Instrument has been published in substitution of the S.I. of the same number which was not laid before Parliament due to an administrative error. It is being issued free of charge to all known recipients of that Statutory Instrument. These Regulations have now been laid before Parliament and no other changes have been made apart from the insertion of the omitted italic date laid cross-heading on page 1.
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 151
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING, ENGLAND & WALES
The High Speed Rail (West Midlands – Crewe) (Qualifying Authorities) Regulations 2021
Made
11th February 2021
Laid before Parliament
5th April 2022
Coming into force
12th February 2021
The Secretary of State makes the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 13(1) of Schedule 17 to the High Speed Rail (West Midlands – Crewe) Act 2021(1).
(1)
2021 c. 2.Citation and commencement
1.  These Regulations may be cited as the High Speed Rail (West Midlands – Crewe) (Qualifying Authorities) Regulations 2021 and come into force on 12th February 2021.Undertakings given by local authorities
2.  The planning authorities specified in the Schedule had, on or before the day on which the Bill for the High Speed Rail (West Midlands – Crewe) Act 2021 was reported from Select Committee in the House of Lords, given the Secretary of State undertakings with respect to the handling of the planning matters arising under Schedule 17 to that Act which the Secretary of State considered satisfactory and have not subsequently been released from their undertakings.Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport
Andrew Stephenson
Minister of State
Department for Transport
11th February 2021Regulation 2
SCHEDULE
Qualifying Authorities
Cheshire East Council
East Staffordshire Borough Council
Lichfield District Council
Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough Council
Shropshire Council
Stafford Borough Council
Staffordshire County CouncilEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations specify the planning authorities which are qualifying authorities for the purposes of Schedule 17 to the High Speed Rail (West Midlands – Crewe) Act 2021. Schedule 17 establishes a planning regime that seeks to give the qualifying authorities an appropriate degree of control over the detailed planning aspects of the Phase 2a stage of the HS2 programme.