S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 902 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Oxford (Educational Endowments) (Akeley 
Church of England School) Order 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23rd July 2021 
Coming into force - 
- 
24th July 2021 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Akeley Church of England 
School, in the county of Buckinghamshire is or has been held in connection with the provision of 
religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a voluntary school, 
the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 12th March 1856 and made between (1) the 
Wardens and Scholars of New College, Oxford and (2) The Reverend John Holford Risley and 
others. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £55,315.26 being the net proceeds of sale of 
the former school premises held on deposit at CLA Investment Management Limited and (b) any 
income derived from those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Oxford Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Oxford (Educational Endowments) (Akeley 
Church of England School) Order 2021 and comes into force on the day after the day on which it 
is made (“the operative date”). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c.56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c.31). 
 
 
 
2
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation being a deed dated 12th March 1856 and made 
between (1) the Warden and Scholars of New College, Oxford and (2) The Reverend John 
Holford Risley and others; 
“the Diocesan Board” means Diocesan Trustees (Oxford) Limited; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Akeley Church of England 
School; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £55,315.26 held on deposit at CCLA Investment Management 
Limited representing the proceeds of sale of the premises of Akeley Church of England 
School, together with any income derived from those assets (whether before or after the 
operative date). 
Division of foundation and trust assets 
3.—(1) The trust assets must be divided into two separate trust funds, namely— 
(a) the Akeley Church of England School Fund (“the School Fund”) comprising eleven-
fourteenths of the trust assets; and 
(b) the Akeley Church of England School Religious Education Fund (“the Religious 
Education Fund”) comprising three-fourteenths of the trust assets. 
(2) The apportionment of the trust assets required by virtue of this article must be made in every 
case after payment of any expenses of administration in accordance with article 5(1). 
Trustee and vesting 
4.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be the trustee of— 
(a) the foundation; 
(b) the trust assets; and 
(c) the School Fund established by article 3(1)(a). 
(2) The trustees of the Akeley Church of England Educational Fund registered charity number 
284170, are hereby appointed to be the trustees of the Religious Education Fund established by 
article 3(1)(b). 
(3) All funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose shall be 
done by any persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
5.—(1) After payment of any expenses of administration the Diocesan Board must account for 
that proportion of the capital and income of the trust assets of the foundation which represents the 
Religious Education Fund, to the trustees of that fund. 
(2) The trustees of the Religious Education Fund must apply the income, and may apply the 
capital of that fund, for educational purposes related to the church of Akeley St James which 
worships at St James and St John Church of England school, Akeley in connection with the 
provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England by means 
of a Sunday School or otherwise. 
(3) The Diocesan Board must hold the School Fund on the terms set out in the Schedule (being 
the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c.18). 
 
 
 
3
Consolidation 
6. The School Fund must be consolidated with the fund known as the Oxford Diocesan Church 
Schools Uniform Statutory Trust Fund(a) and that consolidated fund must be known as the Oxford 
Diocesan Church Schools Uniform Statutory Trust Fund. 
Consultation 
7. The Diocesan Board must consult the Oxford Diocesan Board of Education with regard to the 
exercise of the powers and functions conferred on it by this Order. 
 
 
 
 
Signed by the authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
23rd July 2021 
Department for Education 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 5(3) 
The Uniform Statutory Trusts 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Oxford; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided; 
“relevant trust assets” means the School Fund; 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the relevant trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) The Oxford Diocesan Church Schools Uniform Statutory Trust Fund’s trustee is Diocesan Trustees (Oxford) Limited. The 
assets of the Oxford Diocesan Church Schools Uniform Statutory Trust Fund are held on the uniform statutory trusts.  
 
 
 
4
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the relevant trust assets for either of the purposes 
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
purposes referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints Diocesan Trustees (Oxford) Limited as trustee of the foundation known as 
Akeley Church of England School and makes new provision as to the use of the endowment of 
that foundation. It creates a separate foundation for the purpose of providing religious education in 
accordance with the doctrines of the Church of England in connection with the church of Akeley 
St James which worships at St James and St John Church of England school, Akeley. 
The Order provides for the relevant trust assets to be held on the uniform statutory trusts as set out 
in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of Oxford. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c.18. 
