Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. [****]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Derby (Electoral Changes) Order 2023
Made
***
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”), the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated October 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for Derby. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before each House of Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/east-midlands/derbyshire/derby. .Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Derby (Electoral Changes) Order 2023.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which the Order is made.
(3) Article 3 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors(1), on the day after the day on which the Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(2) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
Derby City Council at a meeting on 19th January 2022 resolved to move to four-yearly ‘all council’ elections, where all councillors will be elected collectively for a period of four years commencing with local elections to be held in 2023. The minutes of the meeting are accessible at https://democracy.derby.gov.uk/Meetingscalendar.aspx. .
(2)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Derby (Electoral Changes) Order 2023”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/east-midlands/derbyshire/derby. ..Wards of Derby and numbers of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of Derby are abolished(1).
(2) Derby is divided into the 18 wards listed in the first column of the table in the Schedule.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in the Schedule.
(1)
The existing wards were created by S.I. 2001/3482.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE
Wards of Derby and numbers of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Abbey 3
Allestree 3
Alvaston North 3
Alvaston South 3
Arboretum 3
Blagreaves 3
Chaddesden East 2
Chaddesden North 2
Chaddesden West 2
Chellaston & Shelton Lock 3
Darley 3
Littleover 3
Mackworth & New Zealand 3
Mickleover 3
Normanton 3
Oakwood 3
Sinfin & Osmaston 3
Spondon 3EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for Derby following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of Derby remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of Derby and replaces them with 18 new ones. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/east-midlands/derbyshire/derby. .
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sectors is foreseen.