S T A T U T O R Y  R U L E S  O F  N O R T H E R N  I R E L A N D  
2022 No. 61 
ROADS 
The Newry River (Diversion of Navigable Watercourse and 
Extinguishment of Public Rights of Navigation) Order (Northern 
Ireland) 2022 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24th February 2022 
Coming into operation - 
26th March 2022 
The Department for Infrastructure (a) proposes to provide for— 
(a) the diversion of part of the navigable watercourse specified in Schedule 1; and 
(b) the extinguishment of any public rights of navigation over the navigable waters specified in 
Article 3. 
The Department considers it necessary or desirable in connection with the construction of a bridge 
over the navigable waters specified in Schedule 1— 
(a) to divert part of the navigable watercourse specified in that Schedule; and 
(b) to extinguish any public rights of navigation over the navigable waters specified in Article 
3. 
The Department has published and served a notice in compliance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of 
Schedule 8 to The Roads (Northern Ireland) Order 1993(b). 
In response to a consultation in 2013, 17 objections were received by the Department prior to the 
closing date of the statutory consultation period. The Department having considered the objections 
that were made and not withdrawn; having given careful consideration of the importance of 
Narrow Water Bridge project to the local community of South Down the fact that it is a 
commitment in New Decade New Approach; and that, as well as delivering social and economic 
advantage, the proposed Bridge will also increase connectivity and maximise tourism potential for 
the region: now proposes to make the Order with modifications and without subjecting the draft 
Order to an examination through a public inquiry 
The Department makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by Articles 5(1) 
and 6 of the Roads (Northern Ireland) Order 1993 and now exercisable by it(c).  
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Formerly the Department for Regional Development: see section 1(6) and (11) of, and Schedule 1 to, the Departments Act 
(Northern Ireland) 2016 (2016 c. 5 (N.I.)). 
(b) S.I. 1993/3160 (N.I 15) 
(c) S.R. 1999 No. 481 Article 6(d) and Schedule 4 Part IV 
 
2
Citation, commencement and interpretation 
1. This Order may be cited as the Newry River (Diversion of Navigable Watercourse and 
Extinguishment of Public Rights of Navigation) Order (Northern Ireland) 2022 and shall come 
into operation on 26 March 2022. 
2. In this Order except were provided otherwise— 
“Drawing 1”, “Drawing 2” and “Drawing 3” means the drawings numbered NWB-ROD-
GEN-AE-DR-CB-400023, NWB-ROD-GEN-AE-DR-CB-400024 and NWB-ROD-GEN-AE-
DR-CB-400025 respectively, marked “The Newry River (Diversion of Navigable Watercourse 
and Extinguishment of Public Rights of Navigation) Order (Northern Ireland) 2022”, copies of 
which have been deposited at the Department’s Roads Service offices, Headquarters, Clarence 
Court, 10-18 Adelaide Street, Belfast BT2 8GB and Southern Division, Marlborough House, 
Central Way, Craigavon BT64 1AD. 
“WHA” means the Warrenpoint Harbour Authority and includes any person or body 
authorised by the Authority to act on its behalf for the purposes of this Order; 
“master”, in relation to any vessel, means the person having the command, charge or 
management of the vessel for the time being; 
“the harbour master” means any person appointed as the harbour master by the WHA under 
section 51 (appointment of harbour, dock or pier master) of the Harbours, Docks and Piers 
Clauses Act 1847 and includes that person’s authorised deputies and assistants; 
“undertaker” means Louth County Council or agents of Louth County Council; and  
“vessel” means any vessel navigable on the Newry River. 
Diversion of navigable watercourse 
3. That part of the navigable watercourse specified in Schedule 1 is diverted upon provision of a 
vessel protection scheme in accordance with Schedule 2 
Extinguishment of public rights of navigation 
4.—(1) All public right of navigation within the areas of the Newry River identified in 
paragraph (2) is extinguished in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2) The areas referred to in paragraph (1) are shown coloured red on the Drawing 1. 
(3) Paragraph (1) does not take effect until the undertaker has, prior to commencement of 
construction of the new bridge— 
(a) notified WHA of the date from which the extinguishment is to have effect; 
(b) published notice of the extinguishment and the date from which the extinguishment is to 
have effect in national publication and once in each of 2 successive weeks in a local 
newspaper published or circulating in both Newry, Mourne & Down Council Area, with 
an interval between the earliest and latest notices of not less than 7 clear days; and 
(c) displayed notice of the extinguishment and the date from which the extinguishment is to 
have effect in a conspicuous position adjacent to the Newry River from the date of the 
first notice published under sub-paragraph (b) above, until at least 7 days after the last 
notice published under sub-paragraph (b). 
(4) The date that is notified, published and displayed under paragraph (3) as the date from which 
the extinguishment is to have effect must not be earlier than 14 days after the last date on which a 
notice is published under paragraph (3)(b). 
(5) As soon as possible following receipt by WHA of notice given by the undertaker under 
paragraph (3), WHA must issue a notice to mariners giving the commencement date and other 
particulars of the extinguishment to which the notice relates. 
 
3
(6) A master of a vessel must not allow a vessel to enter into any part of the areas referred to in 
paragraph (2) without first obtaining the consent of the undertaker which may attach reasonable 
conditions to any consent. 
(7) Before granting a consent under paragraph (6), the undertaker must consult with the harbour 
master. 
 
 
Sealed with the Official Seal of the Department for Infrastructure on 24th February 2022. 
 
(L.S.) 
 
 
 
D Millar 
 
A senior officer of the Department for Infrastructure 
 
 
4
 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
Article 2 
 
LENGTH OF NAVIGABLE WATERCOURSE TO BE DIVERTED 
 
Navigation on part of the Newry River, more particularly delineated and coloured red on Drawing 
1, is diverted by vessel protection systems shown marked “A, C, D to E” on Drawing 1, into the 
Navigation Watercourse as follows— 
Navigation Watercourse 
Shallow tidal waterway 20 metres wide between vessel protection systems and centred 
approximately 165 metres from the centre of A0002 Burren Road Roundabout measured along the 
line of the bridge, more particularly delineated and marked “A to B” on Drawing 2. 
Headway 
(i) In lowered position 2.987 metres above Highest Astronomical Tide (HAT) [3.587 
metres above Mean High Water Spring (MHWS)], [8.687 metres above Admiralty 
Chart Datum], more particularly marked “headway” on Drawing 2. 
(ii) In raised position – unlimited over the width of the Navigation Waterway, more 
particularly delineated and marked “A to B” on drawing 3. 
 
5
 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
Article 2 
 
VESSEL PROTECTION SYSTEM 
 
Interpretation 
1. In this Schedule— 
“Point A”, “Point B”, “Point C”, “Point D”, “Point E”  and “Point F” means Point A, Point B, 
Point C, Point D, Point E, and Point F as shown marked on Drawing 1. 
2. A vessel protection system shall be provided in connection with the construction of a bridge 
over the navigable waters of Newry River in Northern Ireland. 
3. The vessel protection system shall comprise floating fenders and piles situated on either side 
of the public navigable waterway to guide vessels passing through the navigation watercourse. 
4. On the northern side of the public navigable waterway, the vessel protection system extends 
from Point B on the northern bank of Newry River, upstream of the bridge near Narrow Water 
Keep, through Point C on the northern side of the navigation watercourse, upstream of the bridge, 
and Point D on the northern side of the navigation watercourse, downstream of the bridge, as far 
as Point E on the northern bank of the Newry River downstream of the bridge. 
5. The location of Points A, B, C, D, E and F relative to the centre of the A0002 Burren Road 
Roundabout and along the line of the bridge are as follows: 
 
Description 
Reference Point 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
metres 
metres 
metres 
metres 
metres 
metres 
Approximate distance along 
line of the bridge from the 
centre of A0002 Burren Road 
Roundabout 
49 
126 
155 
155 
129 
117 
Approximate offset distance 
from bridge centreline 
60 
upriver 
60 
upriver 
18 
upriver 
18 
down-
river 
57 
down-
river 
57 
down-
river 
 
6. The fendering system in Newry River in Northern Ireland shall consist of a floating fender 
located on the northern side of the navigation watercourse providing a guide for vessels passing 
through the navigation watercourse. The floating fender on the northern side extends between 
Points C and D and is maintained in its position by 4 piles located along its length. 
7. A floating fendering system, secured to guide piles and located approximately 12 metres apart 
will extend from the fendering system at Point C upstream, at approximately 35 degrees away 
from the centreline of Newry River, to Point B. 
8. A floating fendering system, secured to guide piles and located approximately 11 metres apart 
will extend from the fendering system at Point D downstream, at approximately 35 degrees away 
from the centreline of Newry River, to Point E. 
 
 
6
 
 
7
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order provides for the diversion of the navigable watercourse and the extinguishment of any 
public rights of navigation over the navigable waters of the Newry River in the vicinity of Narrow 
Water in relation to Narrow Water Bridge and in so far as they are within Northern Ireland. 
In this Order “Drawing 1”, “Drawing 2” and “Drawing 3” means the drawings numbered NWB-
ROD-GEN-AE-DR-CB-400023, NWB-ROD-GEN-AE-DR-CB-400024 and NWB-ROD-GEN-
AE-DR-CB-400025 respectively, marked “The Newry River (Diversion of Navigable 
Watercourse and Extinguishment of Public Rights of Navigation) Order (Northern Ireland) 2022”, 
copies of which have been deposited at the Department’s Roads Service offices, Headquarters, 
Clarence Court, 10-18 Adelaide Street, Belfast BT2 8GB and Southern Division, Marlborough 
House, Central Way, Craigavon BT64 1AD. 
