S T A T U T O R Y  R U L E S  O F  N O R T H E R N  I R E L A N D  
2023 No. 65 
ROAD TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
The Road Races (North West 200) Order (Northern Ireland) 
2023 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
17th April 2023 
Coming into operation - 
8th May 2023 
The Department for Infrastructure(a) in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 3 of the Road 
Races (Northern Ireland) Order 1986(b) and now vested in it(c), and after consulting the Chief 
Constable, orders and declares as follows. 
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Road Races (North West 200) Order (Northern Ireland) 
2023 and shall come into operation on 8th May 2023. 
Interpretation 
2.—(1) In this Order— 
“contingency day” means the 10th and 12th May 2023; 
“the course” means the roads specified in Schedule 1; 
“marshal” means a person of at least 18 years of age authorised in writing by the promoter to 
assist in connection with the proper conduct of the race; 
“inhabitants” includes local residents, churches, schools and businesses; 
“motor race day” means a day specified in Schedule 2, or a contingency day; and 
“the promoter” means the Coleraine and District Motor Club Limited. 
(2) For the purposes of Articles 6 and 12, the “date of the race” means the date of the first motor 
race day specified in Schedule 2. 
Application 
3. Subject to compliance with all of this Order, the course may be used by the promoter for 
motor races. 
4. All the requirements of this Order shall apply to a contingency day substituted for a motor 
race day as if that contingency day were a motor race day. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Formerly the Department for Regional Development; see section 1(6) and (11) of, and Schedule 1 to, the Departments Act 
(Northern Ireland) 2016 (2016 c. 5 (N.I.)) 
(b) S.I. 1986/1887 (N.I. 17) as amended by the Road Races (Amendment) Act (Northern Ireland) 2014 (2014 c. 1 (N.I.)) 
(c) S.R. 1999 No. 481 Article 6(d) and Schedule 4 Part IV 
 
2
Suspension of right of way and notice 
5.—(1) On the days and during the times specified in Schedule 2 or until the time the races 
are announced by the promoter as completed, whichever is the earlier, the right of way over the 
course of all persons, vehicles and other forms of traffic shall be suspended subject to 
paragraph (2). 
(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to— 
(a) persons appointed by the promoter as officials or marshals, constables, vehicles 
engaged in the race, persons in charge of or directly employed in connection with 
such vehicles and vehicles used by such officials, marshals, or constables; 
(b) vehicles used to cross the course in an emergency by a medical practitioner or for 
fire and rescue, ambulance or police purposes; and 
(c) persons with or without vehicles who reside in the race area crossing the course or 
proceeding on it for that purpose and persons so proceeding or crossing the course 
with or without vehicles in pursuance of statutory powers or duties; 
provided that such persons and vehicles referred to in (b) and (c) shall cross the course only at 
such times and places as may be specified by a person appointed by the promoter as the clerk of 
the course. 
6. The promoter shall give notice of suspension of the right of way on the course by— 
(a) posting, not later than 7 days before the date of the race, placard notices 
specifying the course, the dates (including proposed contingency days) on which, 
and the times during which, the right of way is suspended, in prominent positions 
in the neighbourhood and in particular near the junction of all other roads within 
or adjoining the course; and 
(b) publishing, during each of the 2 weeks preceding the date of the race, 
advertisements giving information as in paragraph (a) in 2 newspapers circulating 
in the locality of the course. 
Prohibition of traffic 
7. It shall not be lawful to cause or permit traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, to use or 
remain on that part of any road between the barricades and its junction with the course during 
the period when the right of way on the course is suspended. 
Cordoning off of the course 
8. The promoter shall— 
(a) close every road opening off the course by means of a proper and sufficient 
barricade or barricades placed at least 10 metres from the course; 
(b) place notice boards on every road at or in the vicinity of the barricades stating that 
the right of way on the course is temporarily suspended; 
(c) ensure that the barricades and notice boards referred to in this Article are— 
(i) in position at least one hour before the start of the road closure; and 
(ii) removed within one hour after the end of the road closure; and 
(d) take all steps necessary to prohibit spectators and other persons, other than the 
promoter’s officials, marshals and constables, from using the carriageway or sides 
of the course during the progress of a motor race. 
9. The promoter shall not open the course to traffic until the last competitor has finished. 
Traffic Management Plan 
10. The promoter shall— 
 
3
(a) agree a traffic management plan with the Department and the Chief Constable, 
and provide and place signs to enable persons to avoid the course; and 
(b) ensure that the signs referred to in this Article are— 
(i) placed in position at least 48 hours before the start of the first practice session; and 
(ii) removed within 24 hours after the end of the last race. 
Provision of marshals 
11. The promoter shall— 
(a) provide a sufficient number of marshals for the proper conduct of the race; 
(b) place marshals at the junction of each road, laneway and accommodation road 
adjoining the course and also at such intervals of about 45 metres alternatively on 
each side of the course; and 
(c) provide each marshal with at least an armlet of distinguishing colour which shall 
be worn by the marshal during the period when the right of way on the course is 
suspended. 
Documents to be produced to the Department 
12. Not less than 14 days before the date of the race the promoter shall lodge with the 
Department a copy of the particulars of the promoter’s proposed arrangements for the conduct 
of the motor races, including arrangements for the use of contingency days, and shall make 
such further arrangements as the Chief Constable may consider desirable in the interests of 
public safety. 
Insurance and indemnities 
13.—(1) The promoter shall have secured insurances and indemnities as follows— 
(a) the promoter is indemnified by a policy of insurance effected with an approved 
Insurance Company or Lloyd’s Underwriters for the sum as specified in 
paragraph (2)(a), which the promoter, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or 
servants, any competitor in the race, the Crown or any servants of the Crown or 
any constable may become legally liable to pay for compensation and litigation 
expenses in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any person, or the loss of, 
or damage to, lands or property adjoining the course caused by or arising out of 
the race, provided that such a policy of insurance may exclude any claim made by 
one competitor against another arising out of accidents occurring during the race; 
and 
(b) the promoter shall have so effected as in sub-paragraph (a) a personal accident 
policy of insurance for such benefits as are specified in paragraph (2)(b) in respect 
of the death of, or bodily injury to, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or 
servants, the servants of the Crown, constables and members of voluntary medical 
services solely in connection with or arising out of the holding of the race. 
(2) The specified sums are— 
(a) liability of the promoter, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or servants, the 
Crown or any servants of the Crown or any constable or any competitor in the 
race, £7,500,000 for any one accident or series of accidents arising out of one 
occurrence, but unlimited in amount as to the total sum payable; and 
(b) in respect of death of, or bodily injury to, any of those persons mentioned in 
paragraph (1)(b) the following benefits— 
(i) death or total loss by physical severance of two limbs or total and irrecoverable loss 
of all sight in both eyes or total loss by physical severance of one limb together with 
the total and irrecoverable loss of all sight in one eye, £65,000; 
 
4
(ii) total loss by physical severance of one limb or total and irrecoverable loss of all sight 
in one eye, £65,000; 
(iii) permanent total disablement, £65,000; 
(iv) temporary total disablement necessarily preventing such person from attending to 
business or occupation or necessarily confining such person to hospital or similar 
institution or to such person’s house or apartment, £250 weekly limited to 52 weeks. 
 
 
Sealed with the Official Seal of the Department for Infrastructure on 17th April 2023 
 
(L.S.) 
 
L McEvoy 
 
A senior officer of the Department for Infrastructure 
 
5
 
SCHEDULE 1 
Article 2 
ROADS IN COUNTIES LONDONDERRY AND ANTRIM 
COMPRISING THE COURSE 
 
1. 
Route B185 (Station Road – Cromore Road), from its junction with Portrush Road, 
Portstewart, Route A2, to its junction with University Park, Coleraine, Unclassified No. 
3522. 
2. 
Ring Road Coleraine, Route A29, from its junction with Cromore Road, Route B185, to 
its junction with Bushmills Road Roundabout, Route A29. 
3. 
Route A29 (Atlantic Road – Coleraine Road – Eglinton Street), from its junction with 
Burn Road, Coleraine, Unclassified No. 3526, to its junction with Sandhill Drive, 
Portrush, Unclassified No. 3543. 
4. 
Route A2 (Portstewart Road – Dhu Varren – Ballyreagh Road – Portrush Road – 
Portmore Road), from its junction with Coleraine Road, Portrush, Route A29, to its 
junction with Atlantic Circle, Portstewart, Unclassified No. 3534. 
5. 
Glenmanus Road, Portrush, Unclassified No. 3303, from its junction with Glenvale 
Crescent, Unclassified No. 3545, for a distance of 100 metres in a southerly direction. 
6. 
Crocknamack Road, Portrush, Route A2, from its junction with Eglinton Street, 
Unclassified No. 3543, to its junction with Hopefield Avenue, Unclassified No. 3304. 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
Article 2 
Motor Race Days 
 
Date 
Time of road closure 
9th May 2023 
9.15 a.m. to 3.15 p.m. 
9th May 2023 
5.00 p.m. to 9.00 p.m. 
11th May 2023 
9.15 a.m. to 3.15 p.m. 
11th May 2023 
5.00 p.m. to 9.00 p.m. 
13th May 2023 
9.15 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order permits the Coleraine and District Motor Club Limited, as promoter of the North West 
200 motor cycle race 2023, to use for that event certain roads specified in Schedule 1 by 
suspending the right of way of other traffic on the motor race days specified in Schedule 2. 
The Order also provides for the use of possible contingency days. 
In effect this Order temporarily closes these roads. 
This Order requires the promoter to give public notice of the promoter’s intended use of these 
roads by displaying placard notices in prominent positions in the neighbourhood of the roads and 
by publishing advertisements in 2 local newspapers. The promoter must also provide marshals, 
seal off the roads and arrange insurance to cover death, bodily injury or loss or damage to property 
resulting from the event. 
