Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2018 No.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Redcar and Cleveland (Electoral Changes) Order 2018
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) published a report dated June 2018 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Redcar and Cleveland, and have decided to give effect to those recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House of Parliament has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Local Government Boundary Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Redcar and Cleveland (Electoral Changes) Order 2018.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors(1) in 2019.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50) and section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, any reference to “the map” means the map held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1) which is marked “Map referred to in the Redcar and Cleveland (Electoral Changes) Order 2018”.
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Printed copies of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principle office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st floor, Windsor House, Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0TL. The map may also be accessed online at http://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-east/redcar-cleveland/redcar-and-clevelandWards of the borough of Redcar and Cleveland and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Redcar and Cleveland are abolished.
(2) The borough of Redcar and Cleveland is divided into 24 wards as listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Guisborough, Saltburn, Marske & New Marske, and Skelton & Brotton
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Guisborough, Saltburn, Marske & New Marske, and Skelton & Brotton are abolished.
(2) The parish of Guisborough is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Saltburn, Marske & New Marske is divided into the four parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Skelton & Brotton is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(6) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of wards and numbers of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Belmont 2
Brotton 3
Coatham 2
Dormanstown 2
Eston 3
Grangetown 2
Guisborough 3
Hutton 3
Kirkleatham 3
Lockwood 1
Loftus 3
Longbeck 2
Newcomen 2
Normanby 3
Ormesby 3
Saltburn 3
Skelton East 2
Skelton West 2
South Bank 2
St Germain’s 3
Teesville 3
West Dyke 3
Wheatlands 2
Zetland 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and numbers of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Guisborough
(1) Name of parish ward (2) Number of councillors
Belmont 4
Guisborough 6
Hutton 6
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Saltburn, Marske & New Marske
(1) Name of parish ward (2) Number of councillors
Longbeck 5
Mickledales 1
St Germain’s 6
Saltburn 6
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Skelton & Brotton
(1) Name of parish ward (2) Number of councillors
Annandale Park 2
Brotton East 4
Brotton West 3
New Skelton & Hollybush 3
North Skelton & Layland 1
Old Skelton 3
Skelton Green 1EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the borough of Redcar and Cleveland following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the borough of Redcar and Cleveland remains unchanged. The changes made by this Order apply in respect of local government elections held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in 2019.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Redcar and Cleveland and replaces them with 24 new ones. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential to the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st floor, Windsor House, Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. The map may also be accessed at http://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-east/redcar-cleveland/redcar-and-cleveland
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sectors is foreseen.