SCOTTISH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 254
PUBLIC HEALTH
The Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel etc.) (Miscellaneous Amendments) (Scotland) (No. 3) Regulations 2021
Approved by the Scottish Parliament
Made
at 12.50 p.m. on 25th June 2021
Laid before the Scottish Parliament
at 3.00 p.m. on 25th June 2021
Coming into force
at 4.00 a.m. on 30th June 2021
The Scottish Ministers make the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 94(1)(b)(i) and 122(2) of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Act 2008(1), and all other powers enabling them to do so.
In accordance with section 122(6) of that Act, the Scottish Ministers consider that these Regulations need to be made urgently, without a draft having been laid before, and approved by resolution of, the Scottish Parliament.
(1)
2008 asp 5.Citation and commencement
1.  These Regulations may be cited as the Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel etc.) (Miscellaneous Amendments) (Scotland) (No. 3) Regulations 2021 and come into force at 4.00 a.m. on 30 June 2021.Amendment of the Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel) (Scotland) Regulations 2020
2.  The Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel) (Scotland) Regulations 2020(1) are amended in accordance with regulations 3 to 5.
(1)
S.S.I. 2020/169, last amended S.S.I. 2021/237.Amendment of schedule A1
3.  In schedule A1—
(a)
in Part 1 (countries, territories, or parts of countries or territories)—
(i)
before “Australia” insert “Antigua”,
(ii)
after “Australia” insert—
“Balearic Islands
Barbados
Barbuda”,
(iii)
after “Brunei” insert—
“Dominica
Grenada”,
(iv)
after “Israel and Jerusalem” insert—
“Madeira
Malta”,
(b)
in Part 2 (United Kingdom Overseas Territories)—
(i)
before “Falkland Islands” insert—
“Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands”,
(ii)
after “Gibraltar” insert—
“Montserrat
Pitcairn”,
(iii)
after “South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands” insert “Turks and Caicos Islands”.Amendment of schedule A2
4.  In schedule A2 (acute risk countries, territories or parts thereof)—
(a)
after “Democratic Republic of Congo” insert “Dominican Republic”,
(b)
after “Egypt” insert “Eritrea”,
(c)
after “Guyana” insert “Haiti”,
(d)
after “Maldives” insert “Mongolia”,
(e)
after “Trinidad and Tobago” insert “Tunisia”,
(f)
after “Turkey” insert “Uganda”.Amendment of schedule 3A
5.  In schedule 3A (specified competitions)—
(a)
in Part 1—
(i)
for paragraph 1 (UEFA Champions League and Europa League fixtures) substitute—
“1.  European Professional Club Football fixtures, including UEFA Champions League, Europa League and Europa Conference League fixtures.”,
(ii)
after paragraph 9B(1) (Golf-AIG Women’s Open) insert—
“9C.  European Tour Golf – Alfred Dunhill Links Championship.
9D.  Golf – ASI Scottish Open.”.
(b)
in Part 2, after paragraph 28(2) (UEFA European Championship fixtures) insert—
“29.  Golf - ASI Scottish Open.
30.  Trust Golf Women’s Scottish Open.
31.  Golf - AIG Women’s Open.”.
(1)
Paragraph 9B was inserted by S.S.I. 2021/237.
(2)
Paragraph 28 was inserted by S.S.I. 2021/158.Amendment of the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Public Health Information for Passengers Travelling to Scotland) Regulations 2020
6.—(1) The Health Protection (Coronavirus, Public Health Information for Passengers Travelling to Scotland) Regulations 2020(1) are amended in accordance with paragraph (2).
(2) In Schedule 2 (passenger notices), for Part 2 (essential information to enter the UK) substitute—
“PART 2
The following is a public health message on behalf of the UK’s public health agencies.
However long you intend to stay in the UK, everyone must take a pre-booked covid-19 test within the first two days after you arrive. If you have been in or transited through any countries on the red or amber list you must also take another pre-booked test 8 days after arrival.
If you have been in or transited through an amber or red country within the previous 10 days you must quarantine for the first 10 days after you arrive.
The symptoms of coronavirus are a new continuous cough, a high temperature or a loss of, or change in, normal sense of taste or smell. If you experience any of these symptoms, however mild, you are advised to make yourself known to the crew.
Please follow the Public Health guidance for the area you are living or travelling in.
Visit gov.uk/coronavirus for more advice.”.
(1)
S.S.I. 2020/170 relevantly amended by S.S.I. 2021/34, S.S.I. 2021/74, S.S.I. 2021/107 and S.S.I. 2021/208.Saving provision
7.—(1) The amendments made by regulations 3 and 4 do not apply in relation to any person who arrived in Scotland during the period beginning at 12:01 am on 30 June 2021 and ending immediately prior to the coming into force of these Regulations, and the Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel) (Scotland) Regulations 2020 continue to apply to such persons as if those amendments made by these Regulations had not been made.
(2) The Health Protection (Coronavirus, Public Health Information for Passengers Travelling to Scotland) Regulations 2020 apply as if the amendments made by regulation 6 had not been made in relation to any international passenger service which departs before these Regulations come into force.MICHAEL MATHESON
A member of the Scottish Government
St Andrew’s House,
Edinburgh
At 12.50 p.m. on 25th June 2021EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations amend the Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel) (Scotland) Regulations 2020 and the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Public Health Information for Passengers Travelling to Scotland) Regulations 2020.
Amendments to the Health Protection (Coronavirus) (International Travel) (Scotland) Regulations 2020 (“the International Travel Regulations”)
Regulation 3 adds Antigua, the Balearic Islands, Barbados, Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Madeira, Malta, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Antarctic Territory, the British Indian Ocean Territory, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn and the Turks and Caicos Islands to the list of exempt countries, territories, and parts of countries or territories, including United Kingdom overseas territories, in Parts 1 and 2 respectively of schedule A1 of the International Travel Regulations. Persons arriving in Scotland from those countries or territories will be exempt from the movement restriction in regulation 6 of the International Travel Regulations. This is subject to the saving provision in regulation 7(1) in respect of persons arriving in Scotland immediately before the coming into force of this provision.
Regulation 4 adds the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Haiti, Mongolia, Tunisia and Uganda to the list of acute risk countries, territories and part of countries or territories in schedule A2 of the International Travel Regulations. This means that persons arriving in Scotland at or after the time these Regulations come into force may only enter Scotland at a designated airport and must be in possession of a managed self-isolation package if, during the 10 days preceding their arrival, they have departed from or transited through any of these countries or territories. Exemptions from isolation are constrained for persons who have, in this period, departed from or transited through an acute risk country or territory. This is subject to the saving provision in regulation 7(1) in respect of persons arriving in Scotland immediately before the coming into force of this provision.
Regulation 5 amends the list of specified competitions in schedule 3A of the International Travel Regulations to include European club football fixtures and various golf competitions.
Amendments to the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Public Health Information for Passengers Travelling to Scotland) Regulations 2020 (“the Public Health Information Regulations”)
Regulation 6 amends schedule 2, Part 2 of the Public Health Information Regulations to update the information that operators are required to provide to passengers who arrive in Scotland. This is subject to the saving provision in regulation 9(2) in relation to any international passenger service which departs before the coming to force of this provision.
An impact assessment is being produced for this instrument and will be published as soon as possible on www.legislation.gov.uk.