WELSH STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2021 No. 237 (W. 60)
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE, WALES
The Velindre National Health Service Trust Shared Services Committee (Wales) (Amendment) Regulations 2021
Made
3 March 2021
Laid before Senedd Cymru
4 March 2021
Coming into force
1 April 2021
The Welsh Ministers, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 203(9) and (10) of, and paragraph 4(1)(f) of Schedule 3 to, the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006(1) make the following Regulations.
(1)
2006 c. 42.Title, commencement and interpretation
1.—(1) The title of these Regulations is the Velindre National Health Service Trust Shared Services Committee (Wales) (Amendment) Regulations 2021.
(2) These Regulations come into force on 1 April 2021.
(3) In these Regulations, “the principal Regulations” means the Velindre National Health Service Trust Shared Services Committee (Wales) Regulations 2012(1).
(1)
S.I. 2012/1261 (W. 156), to which there are amendments not relevant to these Regulations.Amendment of regulation 2 of the principal Regulations
2.—(1) Regulation 2 (interpretation) of the principal Regulations is amended as follows.
(2) In the definition of “chief officers”, at the end insert “, and the chief officer or chief executive of each Special Health Authority established by the Welsh Ministers under section 22 of the Act”.
(3) In the definition of “nominated representative”, at the end insert “and, in relation to a chief officer of a Special Health Authority, an officer member of the chief officer’s Special Health Authority”.Amendment of regulation 7 of the principal Regulations
3.—(1) Regulation 7 (eligibility requirements for members of the committee) of the principal Regulations is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph (2), for “National Health Service Trust or Local Health Board” substitute “Local Health Board, National Health Service Trust or as a chief officer or chief executive of a Special Health Authority”.
(3) In paragraph (3), for “or an executive director of the chief officer’s National Health Service Trust” substitute “, an executive director of the chief officer’s National Health Service Trust or as an officer member of the chief officer’s Special Health Authority”.
(4) In paragraph (4), for “or an executive director of the chief officer’s National Health Service Trust” substitute “, an executive director of the chief officer’s National Health Service Trust or as an officer member of the chief officer’s Special Health Authority”.Vaughan Gething
Minister for Health and Social Services, one of the Welsh Ministers
3 March 2021EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations amend the Velindre National Health Service Trust Shared Services Committee (Wales) Regulations 2012 (“the principal Regulations”) specifically regulations 2 and 7 of the principal Regulations.
Regulation 2 amends the definition of “chief officers” in the principal Regulations to include the chief officer or chief executive of a Special Health Authority in Wales. Regulation 2 also amends the definition of “nominated representative” in the principal Regulations to include a nominated officer of each Special Health Authority.
Regulation 3 amends regulation 7 of the principal Regulations to include in regulation 7(2) a reference to a chief officer or chief executive of a Special Health Authority, and in regulation 7(3) and (4) a reference to an officer member of the chief officer or chief executive’s Special Health Authority.
The Welsh Ministers’ Code of Practice on the carrying out of Regulatory Impact Assessments was considered in relation to these Regulations. As a result, it was not considered necessary to carry out a regulatory impact assessment as to the likely costs and benefits of complying with these Regulations.