S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 1083 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Leicester (Educational Endowments) (Mowsley 
St Nicholas Church of England Primary School) Order 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23rd September 2021 
Coming into force - 
- 
24th September 2021 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as Mowsley St Nicholas Church 
of England Primary School, in the county of Leicestershire, is or has been held in connection with 
the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a 
voluntary school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in a deed dated 31st December 1925 and made between (1) the 
County Council of the Administrative County of Leicester and (2) the Reverend Decimus Albert 
R. Taylor Clerk in Holy Orders minister of the Parish or Chapelry of Mowsley in the County of 
Leicester, Albert Coles Esquire and Edwin Percy North Esquire both churchwardens of the parish 
or chapelry of Mowsley. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) the net proceeds of sale of part of the former 
school premises, being that part comprised in the deed and held on deposit at the Royal Bank of 
Scotland in the sum of £55,674.90; and (b) any income derived from those net proceeds of sale 
before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an Order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Leicester Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b): 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) Section 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Leicester (Educational Endowments) (Mowsley St 
Nicholas Church of England Primary School) Order 2021 and comes into force on the day after 
the day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deed” means the deed of the foundation being a deed dated 31st December 1925 and 
made between (1) the County Council of the Administrative County of Leicester and (2) the 
Reverend Decimus Albert R. Taylor Clerk in Holy Orders minister of the Parish or Chapelry 
of Mowsley in the County of Leicester, Albert Coles Esquire and Edwin Percy North Esquire 
both churchwardens of the parish or chapelry of Mowsley; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Leicester Diocesan Board of Education; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deed; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as Mowsley St Nicholas Church of 
England Primary School; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £55,674.90 held on deposit at the Royal Bank of Scotland, 
representing the endowment of the foundation, being the net proceeds of sale of part of the 
premises of Mowsley St Nicholas Church of England Primary School comprised in the deed, 
together with any income derived from those net proceeds of sale (whether before or after the 
operative date); 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
Trustee and vesting 
3.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be trustee of the foundation and of the trust assets. 
(2) The funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
4. After payment of any expenses of administration, the Diocesan Board must hold the trust 
assets on trust on the terms set out in the Schedule (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in 
Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996)(a). 
Consolidation 
5. The trust assets must be consolidated with the fund known as the section 554 fund(b) and that 
consolidated fund must be known as the section 554 fund. 
 
 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
23rd September 2021 
Department for Education 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c. 18). 
(b) The trustee of the section 554 fund is the Diocesan Board. The assets of the section 554 fund are held on the uniform 
statutory trusts. 
 
3
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 4 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Leicester; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the trust assets for any of the following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the trust assets for either of the purposes referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the trust assets for any of the purposes 
referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Leicester Diocesan Board of Education as trustee of the foundation known 
as Mowsley St Nicholas Church of England Primary School and makes new provision as to the 
use of the endowment of that foundation. 
The Order provides for the trust assets to be consolidated with the fund known as the section 554 
fund and held on the uniform statutory trusts as set out in the Schedule to the Order (being the 
uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996) for the benefit of 
Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, academy schools, alternative provision 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
 
4
academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for the technology of the arts in the Diocese 
of Leicester. 
