S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2021 No. 703 
CIVIL AVIATION 
The Air Navigation (Restriction of Flying) (Raymill House, 
Lacock) (Restricted Area EG R106) Regulations 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
11th June 2021 
Coming into force - 
- 
9th September 2021 
The Secretary of State has decided that it is necessary in the public interest to restrict flying in the 
vicinity of Raymill House, Lacock, Wiltshire, having regard to the security considerations 
associated with this location by reason of it being the residence of a member of the Royal Family. 
The Secretary of State makes the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by 
article 239 of the Air Navigation Order 2016(a). 
Citation and commencement 
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Air Navigation (Restriction of Flying) (Raymill House, 
Lacock) (Restricted Area EG R106) Regulations 2021 and come into force on 9th September 
2021. 
Restricted airspace 
2.—(1) Subject to paragraph (2), no aircraft is to fly below 1,600 feet above mean sea level 
within the area bounded by a circle having a radius of 1 nautical mile whose centre is at 512523N 
0020646W. 
(2) Regulation 2(1) does not apply to any aircraft— 
(a) operating by or on behalf of— 
(i) the National Police Air Service, 
(ii) the Helicopter Emergency Services, 
(iii) the Maritime and Coastguard Agency for the purposes of a Search and Rescue 
operation, 
(iv) The Queen’s Helicopter Flight, or 
(b) flying in accordance with an agreed exemption issued by, or with the permission of, the 
Wiltshire Constabulary Royalty Protection Department. 
 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport 
 
David J Best 
 
Grade 7 
11th June 2021 
Department for Transport 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 2016/765, to which there are amendments not relevant to these Regulations. 
 
2
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Regulations) 
These Regulations impose restrictions on flying in the vicinity of Raymill House, Lacock, 
Wiltshire, in view of the need for security for the members of the Royal Family staying at, or 
visiting, Raymill House and at the request of the security services, the Secretary of State considers 
that it is in the public interest to restrict flying in the vicinity of that location. 
In relation to the exemptions or permissions mentioned in regulation 2(2)(b), these may include 
long-term exemptions for national bodies, local flying clubs or short-term individual permissions. 
Such permissions are to be requested through the Wiltshire Constabulary Royalty Protection 
Department who may be contacted directly via the police non-emergency telephone number 101 
(Option 5) or via the Wiltshire Police website, www.wiltshire.police.uk. 
Full details of this Statutory Instrument will be included in the United Kingdom Aeronautical 
Information Publication and promulgated by Aeronautical Information Circular (AIC) and Notice 
to Airmen (NOTAM). The restricted zone has been designated as EG R106 for the purpose of 
inclusion in that publication and in related charts and documents. 
The point of contact in the Civil Aviation Authority is Mr C W Scott, Airspace Regulator, Safety 
and Airspace Regulation Group, on telephone number 03301 382997. 
