W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2024 No. 673 (W. 92) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A470 Trunk Road (Dinas 
Mawddwy, Gwynedd) (Temporary 
Traffic Prohibitions & Restriction) 
Order 2024 
Made 
 21 May 2024 
Coming into force 
27 May 2024 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A470 
trunk road, are satisfied that traffic on a specified 
length of the trunk road should be prohibited and/or 
restricted by reason of a relevant event, namely the 
Red Bull Hardline mountain biking event, being held 
on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 16A of the 
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this Order. 
Title and commencement  
1. The title of this Order is the A470 Trunk Road 
(Dinas Mawddwy, Gwynedd) (Temporary Traffic 
Prohibitions & Restriction) Order 2024 and this Order 
comes into force on 27 May 2024. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“event period” (“cyfnod y digwyddiad”) means that 
period commencing at 07:00 hours on 27 May 
2024 and ending when the temporary traffic signs 
are permanently removed; 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means— 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c. 27. Section 16A was inserted by the Road Traffic 
Regulation (Special Events) Act 1994 (c. 11), section 1(1). 
By virtue of S.I. 1999/672 and section 162 of, and paragraph 
30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of Wales Act 2006 (c. 
32), these functions are now exercisable by the Welsh 
Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
(a) any vehicle being used for the purposes 
described in section 87 of the Road Traffic 
Regulation Act 1984(1);  
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
(c) any vehicle being used in connection with 
works to the road or lighting or traffic signs or 
emergency works to any sewer or to any main 
or apparatus for the supply of gas, water or 
electricity, or telecommunications in, or in 
any land adjacent to, the length of trunk road 
concerned; 
(d) any vehicle used by an authorised event 
official in support of and for reasons of the 
safety of the relevant event; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A470 
Shrewsbury to Dolgellau trunk road. 
Prohibitions and restriction  
3. Except as provided in article 7, no person may, 
during the event period, cause or permit any vehicle to 
stop or wait on the length of the trunk road described 
in the Schedule to this Order or on any verge 
immediately adjacent to any part of the carriageway of 
that length of the trunk road, except on the direction or 
with the permission of a police constable, police 
community 
support 
officer 
or 
civil 
parking 
enforcement officer.  
4. No person may, during the event period, cause or 
permit any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, to 
                                                                               
(1)  
Section 87 was amended by the Fire and Rescue Services 
Act 2004 (c. 21), Schedule 1, paragraph 55, the Serious 
Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), Schedule 4, 
paragraph 42, the Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), 
Schedule 8, paragraph 29(2) and the Deregulation Act 2015 
(c. 20), section 50(4) and (5). 
 
3
proceed in the lay-bys adjacent to the length of the 
trunk road described in the Schedule to this Order. 
5. No person may, during the event period, drive any 
motor vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle 
specified in article 2(a) and (b), at a speed exceeding 
40 miles per hour on the length of the trunk road 
described in the Schedule to this Order. 
6. No person may, during the event period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle specified in article 2(a) and (b), in such a way 
that it overtakes any other vehicle on the length of the 
trunk road described in the Schedule to this Order 
during such times as the restrictions referred to in 
articles 3 and 5 are in operation. 
Exemptions 
7. A person may cause or permit any vehicle to stop 
or wait on the length of the trunk road described in the 
Schedule to this Order for so long as may be necessary 
to enable— 
(a) a vehicle to be used for police, fire brigade or 
ambulance purposes; 
(b) a vehicle to be used in connection with any of 
the following operations: 
(i) building, 
industrial 
or 
demolition 
operations; 
(ii) the removal of any obstruction to traffic; 
(iii) the 
maintenance, 
improvement 
or 
reconstruction of the length of the trunk 
road; or 
(iv) the laying, erection, alteration or repair 
in, or in land adjacent to, the length of 
the trunk road of any sewer or of any 
main, pipe or apparatus for the supply of 
gas, water or electricity or any electronic 
communications apparatus as defined in 
paragraph 5 of Schedule 3A to the 
Communications Act 2003(1); 
(c) a vehicle to be used in the service of a local 
authority in pursuance of statutory powers or 
duties; 
(d) a vehicle to stop or wait when the person in 
control of it: 
(i) is required by law to stop; 
(ii) is obliged to stop to avoid an accident; or 
(iii) is 
prevented 
from 
proceeding 
by 
circumstances 
outside 
that 
person’s 
control. 
                                                                               
(1) 
2003 c. 21. Schedule 3A was inserted by paragraph 1 of 
Schedule 1 to the Digital Economy Act 2017 (c. 30). 
 
4
Application 
8. The prohibitions and restriction in articles 3, 4, 5 
and 6 apply only during such times and to such extent 
as indicated by traffic signs. 
Suspension 
9. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the length of the trunk road described in 
the Schedule to this Order are suspended during such 
times as the restriction specified in article 5 is in 
operation. 
Duration of this Order 
10. The maximum duration of this Order is 8 days. 
 
 
Signed on behalf of the Cabinet Secretary for North 
Wales and Transport, one of the Welsh Ministers.  
 
Dated                                                        21 May 2024 
 
 
 
Nicci Hunter 
Business Team Leader 
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULE  
 
The length of the trunk road at Dinas Mawddwy, 
Gwynedd that extends from a point 1 metre east of the 
centre-point of its junction with the access road to 
Penantigi Uchaf to a point 1 metre west of the centre-
point of its junction with Ffordd Gilcwm. 
