STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2024 No. 457
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Wiltshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2024
Made
3rd April 2024
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 92(2) of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007(1), Wiltshire Council (“the Council”) made two sets of recommendations in a review to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) for the related alteration of the boundaries of a number of county electoral divisions within the Council’s area.
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England has decided to give effect to the recommendations and makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 92(3) of that Act.
(1)
2007 c. 28 (“the 2007 Act”). Section 92 was amended by paragraph 32 of Schedule 4 to the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 (c. 20) (“the 2009 Act”).
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the 2009 Act. The functions of the Electoral Commission under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the 2007 Act were transferred under section 60 of the 2009 Act to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England on 1st April 2010.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Wiltshire (Electoral Changes) Order 2024.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which it is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2025.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order—
(a)
“the Council’s First Order” means the Wiltshire Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2023(1);
(b)
“the Council’s Second Order” means the Wiltshire Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2023 No. 2(2).
(1)
That Order was made by Wiltshire Council on 26 July 2023, and is available for inspection at the offices of Wiltshire Council, Bythesea Road, Trowbridge, Wiltshire BA14 8JN. Such Orders are not required to be made by statutory instrument.
(2)
That Order was made by Wiltshire Council on 11th December 2023, and is available for inspection at the offices of Wiltshire Council, Bythesea Road, Trowbridge, Wiltshire BA14 8JN. Such Orders are not required to be made by statutory instrument.Alteration of county electoral division boundaries
3.—(1) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Calne and becomes part of the parish of Bremhill by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Calne North county electoral division, and becomes part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(2) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Langley Burrell Without and becomes part of the parish of Bremhill by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Kington county electoral division, and becomes part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(3) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Christian Malford and becomes part of the parish of Bremhill by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Kington county electoral division, and becomes part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(4) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Bremhill and becomes part of the parish of Langley Burrell Without by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Calne Rural county electoral division, and becomes part of the Kington county electoral division.
(5) The area marked J2 on Sheet 5 of the Map that ceases to be part of the parish of Calne Without and becomes part of the parish of Cherhill by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Calne South county electoral division, and becomes part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(6) The area that ceases to be part of the parish of Bromham and becomes part of the parish of Derry Hill & Studley by virtue of the Council’s First Order ceases to be part of the Bromham, Rowde and Roundway county electoral division, and becomes part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(7) The areas marked B and C on Sheet 1 of the Map that cease to be part of the parish of Calne Without and become part of the of the parish of Calne cease to be part of the Calne Rural county electoral division, and become part of the Calne Central county electoral division.
(8) The areas marked N1 and N2 on Sheet 8 of the Map that cease to be part of the parish of Calne Without and become part of the of the parish of Derry Hill and Studley cease to be part of the Calne South county electoral division, and become part of the Calne Rural county electoral division.
(9) In this article, a reference to the “Map” is a reference to the map appended to the Council’s First Order, and any reference to a numbered sheet is a reference to the sheet of the map that bears that number.Alteration of county electoral division boundaries
4.—(1) The areas marked A1 and A2 on the Map that cease to be part of the parish of Westbury and become part of the of the parish of Heywood cease to be part of the Westbury North county electoral division, and become part of the Ethandune county electoral division.
(2) The area marked A3 on the Map that ceases to be part of the parish of Westbury and becomes part of the of parish of Heywood ceases to be part of the Westbury East county electoral division, and becomes part of the Ethandune county electoral division.
(3) The area marked B1 on the Map that ceases to be part of the parish of Heywood and becomes part of the parish of Westbury ceases to be part of the Ethandune county electoral division, and becomes part of the Westbury North county electoral division.
(4) The area marked B2 on the Map that ceases to be part of the parish of Heywood and becomes part of the parish of Westbury ceases to be part of the Ethandune county electoral division, and becomes part of the Westbury East county electoral division.
(5) In this article, a reference to the “Map” is a reference to the map appended to the Council’s Second Order marked “Sheet 1”.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Ailsa Irvine
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
3rd April 2024EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order gives effect to two sets of recommendations made by Wiltshire Council (“the Council”) to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England for related alterations to the boundaries of a number of county electoral divisions within the Council’s area.
The alterations are a consequence of changes to parish boundaries and parish warding arrangements under the Wiltshire Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2023 and the Wiltshire Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2023 No. 2, which were made by the Council under powers including section 86 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (c. 28). A hard copy of each of those Orders is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of Wiltshire Council, Bythesea Road, Trowbridge, Wiltshire BA14 8JN.
The changes described in articles 3 and 4 apply in respect of elections to be held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2025.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.