 
 
 
1
S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2022 No. 310 
EDUCATION, ENGLAND 
The Diocese of Canterbury (Educational Endowments) (St. 
Saviour’s Church of England Junior School) Order 2022 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15th March 2022 
Coming into force - 
- 
16th March 2022 
It has been shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for Education (“the Secretary of 
State”) that the endowment of the educational foundation known as St. Saviour’s Church of 
England Junior School, in the county of Kent is or has been held in connection with the provision 
of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England at a voluntary 
school, the premises of which have ceased to be used for the purposes of such a school. 
The endowment is comprised in the deeds dated 1st December 1885 between The Reverend 
Augustus Adolphus Lyne and The Reverend Augustus Adolphus Lyne and others, dated 3rd 
November 1896 and 19th January 1897 both between Hugh Lindsay Antrobus, Henry Dudley 
Rider and The Reverend Augustus Adolphus Lyne and dated 6th October 1912 between W.R. 
Malcolm, Archibold Campbell, G.J. Marjoribanks and The Reverend T.W. Mylne and others. 
The assets representing the endowment consist of: (a) £55,329 being the net proceeds of sale of 
the former school premises held on deposit with CCLA Investment Management Limited and (b) 
any income derived from those assets before the coming into force of this Order. 
Application for an order making new provision as to the use of the endowment has been made to 
the Secretary of State by the Canterbury Diocesan Board of Education, which body appears to the 
Secretary of State to be the appropriate authority of the Church of England for the purpose. 
Notice of the proposed Order and of the right of persons interested to make representations on it 
has been given in the manner required by section 555(2) and (3) of the Education Act 1996(a). 
No representations have been made on the proposed Order. 
Accordingly, the Secretary of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 554 and 556 of the Education Act 1996(b). 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1996 c. 56. 
(b) Sections 554 and 556 were amended by Schedule 30 to the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 (c. 31). 
 
 
 
2
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as the Diocese of Canterbury (Educational Endowments) (St. 
Saviour’s Church of England Junior School) Order 2022 and comes into force on the day after the 
day on which it is made (“the operative date”). 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“the deeds” means the deeds of the foundation being deeds dated 1st December 1885 between 
The Reverend Augustus Adolphus Lyne and The Reverend Augustus Adolphus Lyne and 
others, and dated 3rd November 1896 and 19th January 1897 both between Hugh Lindsay 
Antrobus, Henry Dudley Rider and The Reverend Augustus Adolphus Lyne and dated 6th 
October 1912 between W.R. Malcolm, Archibold Campbell, G.J. Marjoribanks and The 
Reverend T.W. Mylne and others; 
“the Diocesan Board” means the Canterbury Diocesan Board of Finance; 
“the endowment” means the endowment comprised in the deeds; 
“the foundation” means the educational foundation known as St. Saviour’s Church of England 
Junior School; 
“trust assets” means the sum of £55,329 held on deposit account with CCLA Investment 
Management Limited representing the proceeds of sale of the premises of St. Saviour’s 
Church of England Junior School, together with any income derived from those assets 
(whether before or after the operative date). 
Division of foundation and trust assets 
3.—(1) The trust assets must be divided into two separate trust funds, namely— 
(a) the St. Saviour’s Church of England School Fund (“the School Fund”) comprising 
eleven-fourteenths of the trust assets; and 
(b) the St. Saviour’s Church of England School Religious Education Fund (“the Religious 
Education Fund”) comprising three-fourteenths of the trust assets. 
(2) The apportionment of the trust assets required by virtue of this article must be made in every 
case after payment of any expenses of administration in accordance with article 5(1). 
Trustee and vesting 
4.—(1) The Diocesan Board is appointed to be the trustee of— 
(a) the foundation; 
(b) the trust assets; and 
(c) the School Fund established by article 3(1)(a). 
(2) The vicar and churchwardens of the parish of St. Saviour’s, Westgate are hereby appointed 
to be the trustees of the Religious Education Fund established by article 3(1)(b). 
(3) All funds belonging to or held in trust for the foundation immediately before the operative 
date must be transferred to the Diocesan Board and all acts necessary for that purpose must be 
done by any persons holding such funds. 
Administration of foundation 
5.—(1) After payment of any expenses of administration the Diocesan Board must account for 
that proportion of the capital and income of the trust assets of the foundation which represents the 
Religious Education Fund, to the trustees of that fund. 
(2) The trustees of the Religious Education Fund must apply the income, and may apply the 
capital of that fund, for educational purposes related to the parish of St. Saviour’s, Westgate in 
 
 
 
3
connection with the provision of religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of 
England by means of a Sunday School or otherwise. 
(3) The Diocesan Board must hold the School Fund on the terms set out in the Schedule (being 
the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the Education Act 1996(a)). 
Consolidation 
6. The School Fund must be consolidated with the fund known as the Canterbury Diocesan 
Board of Education General Fund(b) and that consolidated fund must be known as the Canterbury 
Diocesan Board of Education General Fund. 
Consultation 
7. The Diocesan Board must consult the Canterbury Diocesan Board of Education with regard to 
the exercise of the powers and functions conferred on it by this Order. 
 
 
 
Signed by the authority of the Secretary of State 
 
Louise Whitesman 
 
Deputy Director 
15th March 2022 
Department for Education 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 5(3) 
The Uniform Statutory Trusts 
1. In this Schedule— 
“the area” means the Diocese of Canterbury; 
“relevant school” means a voluntary school, a foundation school, an academy school, an 
alternative provision academy, a city technology college or a city college for the technology of 
the arts at which religious education in accordance with the tenets of the Church of England is 
or is to be provided; 
“relevant trust assets” means the School Fund; 
“trustee” means the Diocesan Board. 
2. The trustee may, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the capital and income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
following purposes— 
(a) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of any relevant school in the area; 
(b) for the maintenance of any relevant school in the area; 
(c) in or towards the purchase of a site for, or the erection, improvement or enlargement of, 
the premises of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in the 
area; and 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Schedule 36 was amended by paragraph 10 of Schedule 9 to the Education Act 2005 (c. 18). 
(b) The Canterbury Diocesan Board of Education General Fund’s custodian trustee is the Diocesan Board. The assets of the 
Canterbury Diocesan Board of Education General Fund are held on the uniform statutory trusts. 
 
 
 
4
(d) for the maintenance of a teacher’s house for use in connection with any relevant school in 
the area. 
3. The trustee may also, after payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the 
administration of the trust, apply the income of the relevant trust assets for any of the following 
purposes— 
(a) in or towards the provision of advice, guidance and resources (including materials) in 
connection with any matter related to the management of, or education provided at, any 
relevant school in the area; 
(b) the provision of services for the carrying out of any inspection of any relevant school in 
the area required by Part 1 of the Education Act 2005(a); and 
(c) to defray the cost of employing or engaging staff in connection with— 
(i) the application of income of the relevant trust assets for either of the purposes 
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or 
(ii) the application of capital or income of the relevant trust assets for any of the 
purposes referred to in paragraph 2 above. 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order appoints the Canterbury Diocesan Board of Finance as trustee of the foundation known 
as St. Saviour’s Church of England Junior School and makes new provision as to the use of the 
endowment of that foundation. It creates a separate foundation for the purpose of providing 
religious education in accordance with the doctrines of the Church of England within the Parish of 
St. Saviour’s, Westgate. 
The Order provides for the relevant trust assets to be held on the uniform statutory trusts as set out 
in the Schedule to the Order (being the uniform statutory trusts set out in Schedule 36 to the 
Education Act 1996) for the benefit of Church of England voluntary schools, foundation schools, 
academy schools, alternative provision academies, city technology colleges and city colleges for 
the technology of the arts in the Diocese of Canterbury. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 2005 c. 18. 
