STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. 812
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Mid Sussex (Electoral Changes) Order 2022
Made
14th July 2022
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated February 2022(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of Mid Sussex. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/west-sussex/mid-sussex.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Mid Sussex (Electoral Changes) Order 2022.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on 15th October 2022.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2022;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Mid Sussex (Electoral Changes) Order 2022”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/west-sussex/mid-sussexWards of the district of Mid Sussex and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Mid Sussex are abolished.
(2) The district of Mid Sussex is divided into the 27 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Ansty & Staplefield, Burgess Hill, East Grinstead, Haywards Heath and Lindfield Rural and number of councillors
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Ansty & Staplefield, Burgess Hill, East Grinstead, Haywards Heath and Lindfield Rural are abolished.
(2) The parish of Ansty & Staplefield is divided into the seven parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Burgess Hill is divided into the 11 parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of East Grinstead is divided into the nine parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of Haywards Heath is divided into the nine parish wards listed in the first column of Table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) The parish of Lindfield Rural is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of Table 5 in Schedule 2.
(7) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(8) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
14th July 2022Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the district of Mid Sussex and numbers of councillors
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ardingly, Balcombe & Turners Hill 2
Ashurst Wood & East Grinstead South 1
Burgess Hill Dunstall 2
Burgess Hill Franklands 2
Burgess Hill Leylands 2
Burgess Hill Meeds & Hammonds 2
Burgess Hill St Andrews 2
Burgess Hill Victoria 1
Copthorne & Worth 2
Crawley Down 2
Cuckfield, Bolney & Ansty 2
Downland Villages 1
East Grinstead Ashplats 2
East Grinstead Baldwins 1
East Grinstead Herontye 1
East Grinstead Imberhorne 2
East Grinstead Town 2
Handcross & Pease Pottage 1
Hassocks 3
Haywards Heath Ashenground 2
Haywards Heath Bentswood & Heath 2
Haywards Heath Franklands 2
Haywards Heath Lucastes & Bolnore 2
Haywards Heath North 1
Hurstpierpoint 2
Lindfield 2
Lindfield Rural & High Weald 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and numbers of councillors
Table 1
Parish wards of the parish of Ansty & Staplefield
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ansty 2
Brook Street & Borde Hill 1
Northern Arc East 1
Northern Arc West 1
Rocky Lane North 2
Rocky Lane South 1
Staplefield 1
Table 2
Parish wards of the parish of Burgess Hill
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Burgess Hill Dunstall 1
Burgess Hill Franklands 3
Burgess Hill Gatehouse 1
Burgess Hill Hammonds North 1
Burgess Hill Leylands 2
Burgess Hill Meeds & Hammonds 2
Burgess Hill Norman 1
Burgess Hill St Andrews 3
Burgess Hill St Johns 1
Burgess Hill Victoria East 2
Burgess Hill Victoria West 1
Table 3
Parish wards of the parish of East Grinstead
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
East Grinstead Ashplats North 4
East Grinstead Ashplats South 1
East Grinstead Baldwins 2
East Grinstead Herontye 2
East Grinstead Imberhorne 4
East Grinstead Sackville 1
East Grinstead South 1
East Grinstead Town North 1
East Grinstead Town South 3
Table 4
Parish wards of the parish of Haywards Heath
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Haywards Heath Ashenground 2
Haywards Heath Bentswood & Heath East 3
Haywards Heath Bentswood & Heath West 1
Haywards Heath Franklands 3
Haywards Heath Lucastes & Bolnore 3
Haywards Heath Lucastes Boltro 1
Haywards Heath North Central 1
Haywards Heath North East 1
Haywards Heath North West 1
Table 5
Parish wards of the parish of Lindfield Rural
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Scayne’s Hill & Rural 4
The Hollow 1
Walstead 4EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Mid Sussex following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Mid Sussex and replaces them with 27 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/south-east/west-sussex/mid-sussex.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.