STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2019 No. 1349
NORTHERN IRELAND
The Northern Ireland (Ministerial Appointment Functions) (No. 2) Regulations 2019
Made
15th October 2019
Coming into force in accordance with regulation 1
The Secretary of State, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 5(3) of the Northern Ireland (Executive Formation and Exercise of Functions) Act 2018(1), makes the following Regulations.
In accordance with section 5(4)(a) of that Act, a draft of these Regulations has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
(1)
2018 c. 28. Amended by S.I. 2019/320.Citation and commencement
1.  These Regulations may be cited as the Northern Ireland (Ministerial Appointment Functions) (No. 2) Regulations 2019 and come into force on the day after the day on which they are made.Addition of specified offices
2.—(1) The table in section 5(2) of the Northern Ireland (Executive Formation and Exercise of Functions) Act 2018 (NI Ministerial appointment functions: specified offices) is amended as follows.
(2) After the entry for the Commissioner for Children and Young People for Northern Ireland, insert the following entries—
“Director or chair of the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company Secretary of State
Member or chair of the Agricultural Wages Board for Northern Ireland Secretary of State
Member, chair or vice-chair of the Arts Council of Northern Ireland Secretary of State”.
(3) After the entry for a member of the Commission for Victims and Survivors for Northern Ireland, insert the following entries—
“Member of the Drainage Council for Northern Ireland Secretary of State
Member, chair or deputy chair of the General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland Secretary of State
Member or chair of the Historic Buildings Council Secretary of State”.
(4) After the entry for a member or chair of the Livestock and Meat Commission for Northern Ireland, insert the following entry—
“Member, chair or chief executive of the Northern Ireland Council for the Curriculum, Examinations and Assessment Secretary of State”.
(5) After the entry for the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland, insert the following entries—
“Queen’s Counsel Lord Chancellor
Trustee or chair of the Board of Trustees of the National Museums and Galleries of Northern Ireland Secretary of State”.Robin Walker
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
Northern Ireland Office
15th October 2019EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
Section 5 of the Northern Ireland (Executive Formation and Exercise of Functions) Act 2018 provides for appointment functions of Northern Ireland Ministers in respect of a list of specified offices to be exercised by a Minister of the Crown during the current period while there is no Executive in Northern Ireland. Section 5 also permits additional entries to be added to the list of specified offices by regulations.
These Regulations specify further offices for the purposes of section 5. The effect of this is that the relevant Minister of the Crown may exercise the appointment functions of Northern Ireland Ministers in relation to those offices.
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.