W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2020 No. 675 (W. 152) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A470 Trunk Road (Coryton 
Interchange, Cardiff to Abercynon 
Roundabout, Rhondda Cynon Taf) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions & 
Restrictions) Order 2020 
Made 
2 July 2020 
Coming into force 
6 July 2020 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A470 
trunk road, are satisfied that traffic on specified lengths 
of the trunk road should be prohibited and/or restricted 
because of works proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation  
1. The title of this Order is the A470 Trunk Road 
(Coryton 
Interchange, 
Cardiff 
to 
Abercynon 
Roundabout, Rhondda Cynon Taf) (Temporary Traffic 
Prohibitions & Restrictions) Order 2020 and it comes 
into force on 6 July 2020. 
2. In this Order—  
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means: 
 
 
                                                                               
(1)       1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1. By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c.32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
(a) any vehicle being used for the purposes 
described in section 87 of the Road Traffic 
Regulation Act 1984(2); and 
(b) any vehicle being used for naval, military or 
air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in response, or for practice in responding, 
to a national security emergency by a 
person who has been trained in driving at 
high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person in 
driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A470 
Cardiff to Llangurig trunk road; 
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent periods commencing at 20:00 hours on 
6 July 2020 and ending when the temporary traffic 
signs for each period of works are removed. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on either 
the northbound or southbound carriageway of the 
length of the trunk road specified in Schedule 1 to this 
Order. 
4.—(1) Whilst movement is, by article 3, prohibited 
in the northbound carriageway but pursuant to article 
11 not prohibited in the southbound carriageway, no 
person may, during the works period, drive any vehicle 
in the offside lane of the southbound carriageway of 
the length of the trunk road in any direction other than 
northwards. 
(2) Whilst movement is, by article 3, prohibited in the 
southbound carriageway but pursuant to article 11 not 
prohibited in the northbound carriageway, no person 
may, during the works period, drive any vehicle in the 
offside lane of the northbound carriageway of the 
                                                                               
(2) 
Section 87 was amended by the Fire and Rescue Services 
Act 2004 (c.21), Schedule 1, paragraph 55, the Serious 
Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c.15), Schedule 4, 
paragraph 42, the Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c.22), 
Schedule 8, paragraph 29(2) and the Deregulation Act 2015 
(c.20), section 50(4) and (5). 
 
3
length of the trunk road in any direction other than 
southwards. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle on the lengths of the trunk road specified 
in Schedule 2 to this Order. 
6. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle with a width of or exceeding 2.9 metres on 
the lengths of the trunk road specified in Schedule 3 to 
this Order. 
7. No person may, during the works period, ride any 
pedal cycle on the length of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 3 to this Order. 
8. No person may, during the works period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle in such a way that it 
overtakes any other vehicle on the length of the trunk 
road specified in Schedule 1 to this Order during such 
times as the prohibitions referred to in articles 3 and 4 
are in operation. 
9. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 40 miles per 
hour on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 4 to this Order. 
10. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 50 miles per 
hour on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedules 4 and 5 to this Order. 
Application 
11.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 apply only during such times 
and to such extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
(2) No speed limits imposed by this Order apply to 
an exempted vehicle. 
Suspension 
12. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedules 4 and 5 to this Order are suspended during 
such times as the restrictions specified in articles 9 and 
10 are in operation. 
Duration of this Order 
13. The maximum duration of this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Signed under authority of the Minister for Economy, 
Transport and North Wales, one of the Welsh 
Ministers. 
 
Dated                                                   2 July 2020 
 
 
 
Nicci Hunter 
Business Team Leader 
Welsh Government 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 1  
Contraflow & No Overtaking 
 
The length of the trunk road that extends from a point 
approximately 2.1 kilometres north of Taffs Well 
Interchange to a point approximately 1.75 kilometres 
south of Upper Boat Interchange. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles  
 
The length of the northbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the northbound 
exit slip road at Taffs Well Interchange to the nosing 
of the northbound entry slip road at Upper Boat 
Interchange. 
 
The length of the southbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the southbound 
exit slip road at Upper Boat Interchange to the nosing 
of the southbound entry slip road at Taffs Well 
Interchange. 
 
The length of the northbound entry slip road at Taffs 
Well Interchange. 
 
All northbound and southbound slip roads at Nantgarw 
Interchange. 
 
The lengths of the northbound exit slip road and 
southbound exit and entry slip roads at Upper Boat 
Interchange. 
 
The lay-bys adjacent to the northbound and 
southbound carriageways of the trunk road located 
approximately 1.4 kilometres south of Nantgarw 
Interchange and 1.3 kilometres north of Nantgarw 
Interchange. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
SCHEDULE 3 
Temporary Prohibition of Wide Vehicles (over 2.9 
metres) & Cyclists  
 
The length of the northbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the northbound 
exit slip road at Taffs Well Interchange to the nosing 
of the northbound entry slip road at Upper Boat 
Interchange, including the northbound entry slip roads 
at Taffs Well and Nantgarw Interchanges. 
 
The length of the southbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from the nosing of the southbound 
exit slip road at Upper Boat Interchange to the nosing 
of the southbound entry slip road at Taffs Well 
Interchange, including the southbound entry slip roads 
at Upper Boat and Nantgarw Interchanges. 
 
SCHEDULE 4 
Temporary 40 mph or 50 mph Speed Limits 
 
The length of the northbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 2.1 kilometres north of 
the northbound entry slip road at Coryton Interchange 
to a point 320 metres south of the nosing of the 
northbound exit slip road at Upper Boat Interchange, 
including all northbound exit and entry slip roads.  
 
The length of the southbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 380 metres south of the 
nosing of the southbound entry  slip road at Upper 
Boat Interchange to a point 30 metres north of the 
centre point of the Walnut Tree Railway Over Bridge, 
including all southbound exit and entry slip roads. 
 
SCHEDULE 5 
Temporary 50 mph Speed Limit 
 
The length of the northbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 450 metres north of the 
nosing of the northbound entry slip road at Bridge 
Street Interchange to a point 350 metres south of the 
circulatory carriageway of Abercynon Roundabout, 
including all northbound exit and entry slip roads. 
 
The length of the southbound carriageway of the trunk 
road that extends from a point 35 metres south of the 
circulatory carriageway of Abercynon Roundabout to a 
point 485 metres north of the nosing of the southbound 
exit slip road at Bridge Street Interchange, including 
all southbound exit and entry slip roads. 
 
