S C O T T I S H  S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2018 No. 379 
ROAD TRAFFIC 
The A90 Trunk Road (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) 
(Temporary Prohibitions and Restrictions) (No. 2) Order 2018 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
17th December 2018 
Coming into force - 
- 
21st December 2018 
The Scottish Ministers make the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 
2(1) to (3), 4(1) and 14(1)(b) and (4) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(a) and all other 
powers enabling them to do so. 
In accordance with section 14(1)(b) of that Act, they are satisfied that the traffic on the lengths of 
road specified in the schedule should be restricted because of the likelihood of danger to the 
public, or of serious damage to the road, which is not attributable to works. 
In accordance with section 14(3) of that Act, they have had regard to the existence of alternative 
routes suitable for the traffic which will be affected by this Order. 
Citation, commencement and cessation 
1. This Order may be cited as the A90 Trunk Road (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) 
(Temporary Prohibitions and Restrictions) (No. 2) Order 2018, comes into force on 21 December 
2018 and ceases to have effect on 30 June 2019. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“A90 Trunk Road” means the lengths of the road constructed under the M9/A90/M90 Trunk 
Road (Balmedie to Tipperty) (Trunking and Detrunking) Order 2012(b) between Balmedie 
and Tipperty, and the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010(c) at 
Stonehaven and Blackdog, 
“A96 Trunk Road” means the lengths of the A96 Aberdeen – Inverness Trunk Road 
constructed under the A96 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010(d), 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1984 c.27; section 2(1) and (2) were amended by the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 (c.22) (“the 1991 Act”) 
schedule 8, paragraph 18 and section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic (Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), 
schedule 1.  The Scottish Ministers are the traffic authority by virtue of section 121A of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 
1984 (inserted by the 1991 Act, schedule 8, paragraph 70 and amended by S.I. 2001/1400) as read with section 151(1) of 
the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 (c.54) (relevantly amended by S.I. 2001/1400).  The functions of the Secretary of State were 
transferred to the Scottish Ministers by section 53 of the Scotland Act 1998 (c.46). 
(b) S.S.I. 2012/79. 
(c) S.S.I. 2010/80. 
(d) S.S.I. 2010/82. 
 
2
“AWPR” means the lengths of the road constructed under the A90 (Aberdeen Western 
Peripheral Route) (Craibstone Junction) Special Road Scheme 2010(a) and the A90 (Aberdeen 
Western Peripheral Route) Special Road Scheme 2010(b) between Stonehaven and Blackdog, 
“carriageway” means a part of the road which is provided for the regular passage of vehicular 
motor traffic along the road, 
“central reservation” means a part of the road which separates the carriageway to be used by 
vehicles travelling in one direction from the carriageway to be used by vehicles travelling in 
the opposite direction, 
“emergency layby” means a part of the road which is designed to take the weight of a vehicle, 
is adjacent to and situated on the left hand side of the carriageway when facing in the direction 
in which vehicles may be driven in accordance with article 6, and which is marked with traffic 
signs of the type described as blank diagram 1 in Part 1, and item 9 (stopping prohibited in a 
layby except in emergency) of the sign table in Part 3 of schedule 4 of TSRGD 2016, 
“the road” means the M90/A90/A9000 Edinburgh – Fraserburgh Trunk Road, 
“TSRGD 2016” means the Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 2016(c), 
“verge” means any part of the road which is not a carriageway, an emergency layby or a 
central reservation. 
Application of articles 4 to 11 
3.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 4, and 6 to 11 apply only to the lengths of the 
AWPR specified in Part 1 of the schedule. 
(2) The prohibition in article 5 applies only to the lengths of the AWPR and the A90 Trunk 
Road specified in Part 2 of the schedule. 
Prohibition on use of road 
4.—(1) No person may on any part of the AWPR use, or permit the use of, the classes of traffic 
specified in schedule 3 of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984(d) other than classes I and II. 
(2) No pedestrian may use any part of the AWPR. 
No entry 
5. No person may use, or permit the use of, any of the classes of traffic I to VII specified in 
schedule 3 of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 on any part of the AWPR or, as the case may be, the 
A90 Trunk Road when a prohibition is identified as applying to that part of the AWPR, or the A90 
Trunk Road, by means of a traffic sign of the type described in item 10 (diagram 616 - no entry for 
vehicular traffic) of the sign table in Part 2 of schedule 3 of the TSRGD 2016.. 
Direction of driving 
6.—(1) Where on any part of the AWPR there is a length of carriageway, being a length which 
is not contiguous to a central reservation, which can be entered at one end only a vehicle may only 
be driven or moved on that length of carriageway such that it proceeds away from the point of 
entry of that length of carriageway towards the other end. 
(2) No vehicle may be driven or moved on a length of carriageway of the AWPR which is 
contiguous to a central reservation such that the central reservation is on the left-hand side of the 
vehicle. 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.S.I. 2010/81. 
(b) S.S.I. 2010/79. 
(c) S.I. 2016/362. 
(d) 1984 c.54. 
 
3
(3) No vehicle may be driven or moved so as to cause it to turn and proceed in or face the 
opposite direction where the vehicle is on— 
(a) a length of carriageway of the AWPR on which vehicles are required in terms of this 
article to be driven in one direction only and is proceeding in or facing that direction, or 
(b) any other length of carriageway of the AWPR and is proceeding in or facing one 
direction. 
Prohibition on use of the central reservation or verge 
7. No vehicle may be driven, moved, stopped or remain at rest on a central reservation or verge 
on any part of the AWPR. 
Restriction on stopping 
8.—(1) No vehicle may stop, or remain at rest, on the carriageway of any part of the AWPR. 
(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply where it is necessary for a vehicle which is being driven on the 
carriageway of the AWPR to be stopped— 
(a) because of a breakdown or mechanical defect or lack of fuel, oil or water, required for the 
vehicle, 
(b) because of any accident, illness or other emergency, 
(c) to permit any person carried in or on the vehicle to recover or move any object which has 
fallen on the road, or 
(d) to permit any person carried in or on the vehicle to give help which is required by any 
other person in any of the circumstances specified in the provisions of this paragraph. 
(3) A vehicle to which paragraph (2) applies must, as soon and insofar as is reasonably 
practicable and safe, be driven or moved off the carriageway of the AWPR on to, and may stop 
and remain at rest in, an emergency layby. 
(4) A vehicle— 
(a) which is at rest in an emergency layby may, so far as is reasonably practicable, be 
allowed to remain at rest there in such a position only that no part of the vehicle or of any 
load it carries may obstruct or be a cause of danger to vehicles using the carriageway, and 
(b) may not remain at rest in an emergency layby for longer than is necessary in the 
circumstances or for the purposes specified in paragraph (2). 
(5) Nothing in this article prohibits a vehicle from being stopped or remaining at rest on the 
carriageway of the AWPR while it is prevented from proceeding along the carriageway by the 
presence of any other vehicle, person or object. 
Restriction on reversing 
9. No vehicle may be driven or moved backwards on any part of the AWPR except to the extent 
that it is necessary to drive or move the vehicle backwards to enable it to proceed forwards or to 
be connected to any other vehicle. 
Restriction on the use of emergency laybys 
10. No vehicle may be driven, moved, stop, or remain at rest in an emergency layby on the 
AWPR, except in accordance with article 8(3) and (4). 
Restrictions affecting animals carried in vehicles 
11.—(1) A person in charge of an animal which is carried by a vehicle must not, so far as is 
practicable while the vehicle is on any part of the AWPR— 
(a) remove the animal from the vehicle, or 
 
4
(b) permit the animal to leave the vehicle. 
(2) If an animal escapes from, or it is necessary for it to be removed from, or to be permitted to 
leave a vehicle on the AWPR, any person in charge of that animal must not, so far as is 
practicable— 
(a) permit the animal to go onto or remain on any part of the AWPR other than an emergency 
layby or a verge, and 
(b) permit the animal not to be held on a lead or otherwise kept under control while on any 
part of the AWPR. 
Exemptions for vehicles 
12. Articles 4 to 11 do not apply to— 
(a) a vehicle being used in an emergency for fire and rescue, ambulance, police or coastguard 
purposes, 
(b) a vehicle being used for carrying out any maintenance, inspection, clearance, cleaning, 
repair, alteration or improvement of any part of the road, 
(c) a vehicle being used for the erection, laying, placing, maintenance, testing, alteration, 
repair or removal of any structure, works, apparatus in, on, under or over any part of the 
road, 
(d) a vehicle being used in the investigation of an accident or incident which has occurred on 
or near the road, 
(e) a vehicle being used in connection with a breakdown or mechanical defect or lack of fuel, 
oil or water, required for a vehicle, including in connection with the recovery and 
removal of that vehicle, or 
(f) a vehicle being used in accordance with any direction given by a constable in uniform or 
in accordance with the indication given by a traffic sign. 
Exemptions for pedestrians and cyclists 
13. Article 4 does not apply to any person being present on or using any part of the AWPR— 
(a) in accordance with any direction given by a constable in uniform or in accordance with 
the indication given by a traffic sign, 
(b) where, in accordance with the permission given by a constable or the roads authority, 
they do so for the purpose of investigating any accident or incident which has occurred on 
or near the road, 
(c) where it is necessary for that person to do so to avoid or prevent an accident or to obtain 
or give help required as a result of an accident or emergency, and they do so in such 
manner as to cause as little danger and inconvenience as possible to other traffic on the 
road, 
(d) where they do so in the exercise of their duty as a constable, as a member of a fire and 
rescue service, of an ambulance service, or the coastguard, 
(e) where it is necessary for them to do so to carry out in an efficient manner— 
(i) the maintenance, inspection, repair, cleaning, clearance, alteration or improvement of 
any part of the road, 
(ii) the removal of any vehicle from any part of the road, or 
(iii) the erection, laying, placing, maintenance, testing, alteration, repair or removal of 
any structure, works or apparatus in, on, under or over any part of the road, 
(f) where it is necessary for them to do so in connection with any inspection, survey, 
investigation or census which is carried out in accordance with any authority granted by 
the Scottish Ministers, or 
 
5
(g) where they do so in order to use a place on the carriageway where provision is made for 
either pedestrians only, or pedestrians and pedal cyclists, to cross the carriageway. 
Speed restrictions 
14.—(1) No person may use, or permit the use of, a vehicle on any length of the A90 Trunk 
Road specified in Part 3 of the schedule at a speed exceeding 30 miles per hour when that 
restriction is identified as applying to that length of the A90 Trunk Road by means of a traffic sign 
of the type described in item 1 (diagram 670 – maximum speed limit in mph) of the sign table in 
Part 2 of schedule 10 of TSRGD 2016(a). 
(2) No person may use, or permit the use of, a vehicle on any length of the AWPR, or of the 
A90 Trunk Road, specified in Part 4 of the schedule at a speed exceeding 40 miles per hour when 
that restriction is identified as applying to that length of the AWPR, or of the A90 Trunk Road, by 
means of a traffic sign of the type described in item 1 (diagram 670 – maximum speed limit in 
mph) of the sign table in Part 2 of schedule 10 of TSRGD 2016. 
(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) do not apply to— 
(a) vehicles falling within regulation 3(4) of the Road Traffic Exemptions (Special Forces) 
(Variation and Amendment) Regulations 2011(b) when used in accordance with 
regulation 3(5) of those Regulations, or 
(b) vehicles being used in an emergency for coastguard purposes. 
Revocation 
15. The A90 Trunk Road (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) (Temporary Prohibitions and 
Restrictions) Order 2018(c) is hereby revoked. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  D LAIRD  
 
A member of the staff of the Scottish Ministers 
Buchanan House, 
Glasgow 
17th December 2018 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 2016/362. 
(b) S.I. 2011/935. 
(c) S.S.I. 2018/366.  
 
6
 
SCHEDULE 
Articles 3 and 14 
PART 1 
SPECIFIED LENGTHS OF ROAD 
1. That length of the AWPR being the northbound carriageway from its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at Stonehaven North Junction to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of Cleanhill Roundabout, a distance of 11.45 kilometres or thereby. 
2. That length of the AWPR being the southbound carriageway from its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of Cleanhill Roundabout to its junction with the circulatory carriageway 
of the roundabout at Stonehaven North Junction, a distance of 11.45 kilometres or thereby. 
3. That length of the AWPR being the entire circulatory carriageway of Cleanhill Roundabout, a 
distance of 250 metres or thereby. 
4. That length of the AWPR being the northbound carriageway from its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of Cleanhill Roundabout to a point 10 metres or thereby south-west of its 
junction with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at Blackdog Junction, a distance of 
27.33 kilometres of thereby. 
5. That length of the AWPR being the southbound carriageway from a point 10 metres or 
thereby south-west of its junction with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at Blackdog 
Junction to its junction with the circulatory carriageway of Cleanhill Roundabout, a distance of 
27.33 kilometres of thereby. 
6. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Deeside Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at that Deeside Junction, a distance of 593 metres or thereby. 
7. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip at Deeside Junction from its junction 
with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at that Deeside Junction to its junction with the 
northbound carriageway, a distance of 670 metres or thereby. 
8. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Deeside Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at that Deeside Junction, a distance of 809 metres or thereby. 
9. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip at Deeside Junction from its junction 
with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at that Deeside Junction to its junction with the 
southbound carriageway, a distance of 878 metres or thereby. 
10. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to Strathdon Road at 
that Kingswells South Junction, a distance of 772 metres or thereby. 
11. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its junction with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to 
Strathdon Road at that Kingswells South Junction to its junction with the northbound carriageway, 
a distance of 839 metres or thereby. 
12. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to Strathdon Road at 
that Kingswells South Junction, a distance of 673 metres or thereby. 
 
7
13. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its junction with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to 
Strathdon Road at that Kingswells South Junction to its junction with the southbound carriageway, 
a distance of 775 metres or thereby. 
14. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip at Kingswells North Junction from 
its junction with road that connects that Kingswells North Junction and the C89C Chapel of 
Stoneywood to Fairley Road to its junction with the northbound carriageway, a distance of 555 
metres or thereby. 
15. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Kingswells North Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the road 
that connects that Kingswells North Junction and the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley 
Road, a distance of 576 metres or thereby. 
16. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the A96 Trunk 
Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley Road and the 
roundabout at the A96 Trunk Road, a distance of 741 metres or thereby. 
17. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
junction with the A96 Trunk Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood 
to Fairley Road and the roundabout at the A96 Trunk Road to its junction with the northbound 
carriageway, a distance of 584 metres or thereby. 
18. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the A96 Trunk 
Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley road and the 
roundabout at the A96 Trunk road, a distance of 615 metres or thereby. 
19. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
junction with the A96 Trunk Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood 
to Fairley Road and the roundabout at the A96 Trunk Road to its junction with the southbound 
carriageway, a distance of 798 metres or thereby. 
20. That length of the AWPR being the eastbound off slip at Parkhill Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the eastbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at the A947 Aberdeen to Oldmeldrum to Turriff Road at that 
Parkhill Junction, a distance of 494 metres or thereby. 
21. That length of the AWPR being the eastbound on slip at Parkhill Junction from its junction 
with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A947 Aberdeen to Oldmeldrum to 
Turriff Road at that Parkhill Junction to its junction with the eastbound carriageway, a distance of 
624 metres or thereby. 
22. That length of the AWPR being the westbound off slip at Parkhill Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the westbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at the B977 Echt to Balmedie Road at that Parkhill Junction, a 
distance of 677 metres or thereby. 
23. That length of the AWPR being the westbound on slip at Parkhill Junction from its junction 
with the circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the B977 Echt to Balmedie Road at that 
Parkhill Junction to its junction with the westbound carriageway, a distance of 674 metres or 
thereby. 
 
8
PART 2 
SPECIFIED LENGTHS OF ROAD 
24. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to Strathdon Road at 
that Kingswells South Junction, a distance of 772 metres or thereby. 
25. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Kingswells South Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at the A944 Aberdeen to Alford to Strathdon Road at 
that Kingswells South Junction, a distance of 673 metres or thereby. 
26. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Kingswells North Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the road 
that connects that Kingswells North Junction and the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley 
Road, a distance of 576 metres or thereby. 
27. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the A96 Trunk 
Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley Road and the 
roundabout at the A96 Trunk Road, a distance of 741 metres or thereby. 
28. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the A96 Trunk 
Road being the road that connects the C89C Chapel of Stoneywood to Fairley Road and the 
roundabout at the A96 Trunk Road, a distance of 615 metres or thereby. 
29. That length of the AWPR being the eastbound off slip at Parkhill Junction from its 
commencement at tis junction with the eastbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at the A947 Aberdeen to Oldmeldrum to Turriff Road at that 
Parkhill Junction, a distance of 494 metres or thereby. 
30. That length of the AWPR being the westbound off slip at Parkhill Junction from its 
commencement at its junction with the westbound carriageway to its junction with the circulatory 
carriageway of the roundabout at the B977 Echt to Balmedie Road at that Parkhill Junction, a 
distance of 677 metres or thereby. 
31. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound off slip at Blackdog Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the roundabout at Blackdog Junction, a distance of 500 metres or 
thereby. 
32. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound off slip at Balmedie Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the west roundabout at that Balmedie Junction, a distance of 471 metres 
or thereby. 
33. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound off slip at Balmedie Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the 
circulatory carriageway of the east roundabout at that Balmedie Junction, a distance of 485 metres 
or thereby. 
34. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound off slip at Newburgh Road 
Junction from its commencement at its junction with the northbound carriageway to its junction 
with the A975 Newburgh to Cruden Bay Road at that Newburgh Road Junction, a distance of 694 
metres or thereby. 
 
9
35. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound off slip at Tipperty Junction from 
its commencement at its junction with the southbound carriageway to its junction with the B9000 
Newburgh to Pitmedden Road at that Tipperty Junction, a distance of 768 metres or thereby. 
PART 3 
SPECIFIED LENGTHS OF ROAD 
36. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound off slip from its intersection with 
the Balmedie Junction west roundabout, in a generally northerly direction, a distance of 20 metres 
or thereby. 
37. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound on slip from its intersection with 
the Balmedie Junction west roundabout, in a generally north-easterly direction for a distance of 
305 metres or thereby. 
38. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound off slip from its intersection with 
the Balmedie Junction east roundabout, in a generally southerly direction, a distance of 25 metres 
or thereby. 
39. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound on slip from its intersection with 
the Balmedie Junction east roundabout, in a generally south-westerly direction for a distance of 
350 metres or thereby. 
PART 4 
SPECIFIED LENGTHS OF ROAD 
40. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the entire circulatory carriageway of the 
Stonehaven North Junction roundabout, a distance of 219 metres or thereby. 
41. That length of the A90 Trunk Road from its intersection with the Stonehaven North Junction 
roundabout, in a generally southerly direction for a distance of 231 metres or thereby. 
42. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound off slip from its intersection with 
the Stonehaven North Junction roundabout, in a generally south-easterly direction for a distance of 
132 metres or thereby. 
43. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound on slip at Stonehaven North 
Junction from a point 292 metres or thereby west of its junction with the A90 Trunk Road being 
the road that connects the B979 Netherley Road and the roundabout at Stonehaven North Junction 
to that junction, a distance of 292 metres or thereby. 
44. That length of the AWPR from its intersection with the Stonehaven North Junction 
roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 42 metres or thereby. 
45. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip from its intersection with the 
Deeside Junction roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 36 metres or 
thereby. 
46. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip from its intersection with the 
Deeside Junction roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 36 metres or 
thereby. 
47. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip from its intersection with the 
Deeside Junction roundabout, in a generally easterly direction for a distance of 26 metres or 
thereby. 
 
10
48. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip from its intersection with the 
Deeside Junction roundabout, in a generally easterly direction for a distance of 26 metres or 
thereby. 
49. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells South Junction roundabout, in a generally south-westerly direction for a distance of 
440 metres or thereby. 
50. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells South Junction roundabout, in a generally north-easterly direction for a distance of 416 
metres or thereby. 
51. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells South Junction roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 319 
metres or thereby. 
52. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells South Junction roundabout, in a generally south-westerly direction for a distance of 
318 metres or thereby. 
53. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells North Junction link road, in a generally north-easterly direction for a distance of 46 
metres or thereby. 
54. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip from its intersection with the 
Kingswells North Junction link road, in a generally north-easterly direction for a distance of 52 
metres or thereby. 
55. That length of the AWPR being the northbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
intersection with the A96 Trunk Road, in a generally southerly direction for a distance of 179 
metres or thereby. 
56. That length of the AWPR being the northbound on slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
intersection with the A96 Trunk Road, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 22 
metres or thereby. 
57. That length of the AWPR being the southbound off slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
intersection with the A96 Trunk Road, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 188 
metres or thereby. 
58. That length of the AWPR being the southbound on slip at Craibstone Junction from its 
intersection with the A96 Trunk Road, in a generally southerly direction for a distance of 41 
metres or thereby. 
59. That length of the AWPR being the eastbound off slip from its intersection with the Parkhill 
Junction west roundabout, in a generally westerly direction for a distance of 52 metres or thereby. 
60. That length of the AWPR being the eastbound on slip from its intersection with the Parkhill 
Junction west roundabout, in a generally easterly direction for a distance of 304 metres or thereby. 
61. That length of the AWPR being the westbound off slip from its intersection with the Parkhill 
Junction east roundabout, in a generally north-easterly direction for a distance of 44 metres or 
thereby. 
62. That length of the AWPR being the westbound on slip from its intersection with the Parkhill 
Junction east roundabout, in a generally westerly direction for a distance of 354 metres or thereby. 
63. That length of the AWPR from a point 10 metres or thereby south-west of its intersection 
with the Blackdog Junction roundabout, in a generally south-westerly direction for a distance of 
22 metres or thereby. 
64. That length of the A90 Trunk Road from its intersection with the Blackdog Junction 
roundabout, in a generally south-westerly direction for a distance of 10 metres or thereby. 
 
11
65. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the entire circulatory carriageway of the Blackdog 
Junction roundabout, a distance of 488 metres or thereby. 
66. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound on slip from its intersection with 
the Blackdog Junction roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 236 metres 
or thereby. 
67. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound off slip from its intersection with 
the Blackdog Junction roundabout, in a generally northerly direction for a distance of 268 metres 
or thereby. 
68. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the northbound off slip at Newburgh Road 
Junction from its intersection with the A975 Newburgh to Cruden Bay Road, in a generally 
southerly direction for a distance of 456 metres or thereby. 
69. That length of the A90 Trunk Road being the southbound on slip at Newburgh Road 
Junction from its intersection with the A975 Newburgh to Cruden Bay Road, in a generally 
southerly direction for a distance of 331 metres or thereby. 
