STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No. 198
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Stroud (Electoral Changes) Order 2020
Made
28th February 2020
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) to (4)
Under section 92(2) of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007(1), Stroud District Council (“the Council”) made recommendations in a review to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) for the related alteration of the boundaries of district wards and county electoral divisions within the Council’s area.
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England has decided to give effect to the recommendations and makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 92(3) of that Act.
(1)
2007 c. 28 (“the 2007 Act”). Section 92 was amended by paragraph 32 of Schedule 4 to the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 (c. 20) (“the 2009 Act”).
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the 2009 Act. The functions of the Electoral Commission under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the 2007 Act were transferred under section 60 of the 2009 Act to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England on 1st April 2010.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Stroud (Electoral Changes) Order 2020.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Article 3 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2020.
(4) Article 4 comes into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2021.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50) and section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.  In this Order—
“the Council’s first Order” means the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2020;
“the Council’s second Order” means the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 2) Order 2020(1).
(1)
Those Orders were made on 31st January 2020 and 5th February 2020 respectively by Stroud District Council under, amongst other provisions, section 86 of the 2007 Act. The Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2020 was amended by the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (Amendment) Order 2020 which was made on 27th February 2020. Such Orders are not required to be made by statutory instrument. A hard copy of each Order is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of Stroud District Council, Ebley Mill, Ebley Wharf, Stroud GL5 4UB. They are also accessible online at https://www.stroud.gov.uk.Alteration of district ward boundaries
3.—(1) Each area that ceases, in consequence of the Council’s first Order or the Council’s second Order(1), to be part of the parish listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1 and becomes part of the parish listed in the corresponding entry in the second column of that table, ceases to be part of the district ward listed in the corresponding entry in the third column of that table and becomes part of the district ward listed in the corresponding entry in the fourth column of that table.
(2) The area to the west of the parish boundary between Stonehouse and Cainscross parishes that ceases, in consequence of the Council’s second Order, to be part of the Cainscross district ward, becomes part of the Stonehouse district ward.
(1)
The entry in table 1 in Schedule 1 relating to Wotton-under-Edge is in consequence of the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 2) Order 2020; the other entries in that table are all consequential on the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2020.Alteration of county electoral division boundaries
4.—(1) Each area that ceases, in consequence of the Council’s first Order, to be part of the parish listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 2 and becomes part of the parish listed in the corresponding entry in the second column of that table, ceases to be part of the electoral division listed in the corresponding entry in the third column of that table and becomes part of the electoral division listed in the corresponding entry in the fourth column of that table.
(2) The area to the east of the parish boundary between Stonehouse and Cainscross parishes that ceases, in consequence of the Council’s second Order, to be part of the Stonehouse county division, becomes part of the Rodborough county division.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Jolyon Jackson
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
28th February 2020Article 3
SCHEDULE 1
(1)
From parish
(2)
To parish
(3)
From district ward
(4)
To district ward
Bisley-with-Lypiatt Chalford Bisley Chalford
Chalford Bisley-with-Lypiatt Chalford Bisley
Eastington Stonehouse Severn Stonehouse
Standish Stonehouse Hardwicke Stonehouse
Nailsworth Minchinhampton Nailsworth Minchinhampton
Rodborough Minchinhampton Rodborough Amberley and Woodchester
Stroud Brimscombe & Thrupp Stroud Trinity Thrupp
Wotton-under-Edge Kingswood Kingswood Wotton-under-EdgeArticle 4
SCHEDULE 2
(1)
From parish
(2)
To parish
(3)
From electoral division
(4)
To electoral division
Bisley-with-Lypiatt Chalford Bisley & Painswick Minchinhampton
Chalford Bisley-with-Lypiatt Minchinhampton Bisley & Painswick
Nailsworth Minchinhampton Nailsworth Minchinhampton
Rodborough Minchinhampton Rodborough Nailsworth
Stroud Brimscombe & Thrupp Stroud Central MinchinhamptonEXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order gives effect to recommendations made by Stroud District Council to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England for related alterations of district ward and county electoral division boundaries.
The alterations are a consequence of changes to parish boundaries and parish warding arrangements under the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) Order 2020 and the Stroud District Council (Reorganisation of Community Governance) (No. 2) Order 2020, each Order made by Stroud District Council under, amongst other provisions, section 86 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (c. 28). A hard copy of each Order is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of Stroud District Council, Ebley Mill, Ebley Wharf, Stroud GL5 4UB. It is also accessible online at: https://www.stroud.gov.uk
The changes to the district ward boundaries under article 3 apply in respect of elections to be held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2020.
The changes to the county electoral divisions under article 4 apply in respect of elections to be held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2021.
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sectors is foreseen.