 
 
W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2020 No. 1180 (W. 266) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES  
The A465 Trunk Road (Dowlais 
Top Roundabout, Merthyr Tydfil to 
Aberdulais Interchange, Neath Port 
Talbot) (Temporary Prohibition of 
Vehicles, Cyclists & Pedestrians) 
Order 2020 
 
 
Made 
17 March 2020 
Coming into force 
23 March 2020 
                  
 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the A465 
Trunk Road, are satisfied that traffic on specified 
lengths of the trunk road should be prohibited because 
of works proposed on or near the road. 
 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1) and (4) 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make this 
Order. 
 
Title, Commencement and Interpretation 
   
1. The title of this Order is the A465 Trunk Road 
(Dowlais Top Roundabout, Merthyr Tydfil to 
Aberdulais 
Interchange, 
Neath 
Port 
Talbot) 
(Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles, Cyclists & 
Pedestrians) Order 2020 and it comes into force on 
23 March 2020. 
 
     2.  (1) In this Order— 
 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means any 
vehicle being used by the emergency services or in 
connection with the works giving rise to this Order; 
 
 
(1)  1984 c.27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic 
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c.26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1.  By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, and 
paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of Wales Act 
2006(c.32), these powers are now exercisable by the Welsh 
Ministers in relation to Wales. 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the A465 
Neath to Abergavenny trunk road;  
 
“works 
period” 
(“cyfnod 
y 
gwaith”) 
means 
intermittent periods commencing at 20:00 hours on 23 
March 2020 and ending when the temporary traffic 
signs for each period of works are removed. 
 
Prohibitions 
   3. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on the 
lengths of the trunk road specified in the Schedule to 
this Order. 
 
   4. No person may, during the works period, ride any 
pedal cycle on the lengths of the trunk road specified 
in the Schedule to this Order. 
 
   5. No pedestrian may, during the works period, 
proceed on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
the Schedule. 
 
Application 
   6. The prohibitions in articles 3, 4 and 5 apply only 
during such times and to such extent as indicated by 
traffic signs. 
 
Duration of this Order 
   7. The maximum duration for this Order is 18 
months. 
 
 
Signed under authority of the Minister for Economy, 
Transport and North Wales, one of the Welsh 
Ministers. 
 
Dated the                                     17 March 2020 
 
 
 
 
Richard Morgan 
Head of Planning, Asset Management and Standards 
Welsh Government  
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
 
1. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Dowlais Top 
Roundabout to its junction with the north-eastern side 
of Cefn-coed-y-cymmer Roundabout. 
 
2. The length of the eastbound entry road of the trunk 
road at Pant Industrial Estate Junction that extends 
from a point 12 metres south of its junction with Pant 
Industrial Estate Road to its junction with the main 
eastbound carriageway of the trunk road. 
 
3. The length of the westbound entry road of the trunk 
road at Pant Industrial Estate Junction that extends 
from a point 50 metres north of its junction with 
Rocky Road to its junction with the main westbound 
carriageway of the trunk road. 
 
4. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Cefn-coed-y-
cymmer Roundabout to its junction with the eastern 
side of Hirwaun Roundabout. 
 
5. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction 
with 
the 
western 
side 
of 
Hirwaun 
Roundabout to its junction with the south-eastern side 
of Rhigos Roundabout. 
 
6. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Rhigos Roundabout to the nosing of 
the westbound entry slip road at Glynneath 
Interchange.  
 
7. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the 
eastbound exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to 
its junction with the western side of Rhigos 
Roundabout. 
 
8. The entire lengths of the westbound and eastbound 
entry slip roads at Glynneath Interchange. 
 
9. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from the nosing of the western 
exit slip road at Glynneath Interchange to its junction 
with the eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout. 
 
10. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
eastern side of Cwmgwrach Roundabout to the nosing 
of the eastbound entry slip road at Glynneath 
Interchange. 
 
11. The length of the trunk road that extends from its 
junction with the western side of Cwmgwrach 
Roundabout to its junction with the eastern side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
 
12. The length of the westbound carriageway of the 
trunk road that extends from its junction with the 
western side of Resolven Roundabout to the nosing  
of the westbound entry slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange.  
 
13. The length of the eastbound carriageway of the 
trunk road (including the eastbound entry slip road at 
Aberdulais Interchange) that extends from the nosing 
of the northbound exit slip road at Aberdulais 
Interchange to its junction with the western side of 
Resolven Roundabout. 
 
 
 
