STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2020 No. 1533
PUBLIC HEALTH, ENGLAND
The Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2020
Approved by both Houses of Parliament
Made
at 3.00 p.m. on 14th December 2020
Laid before Parliament
at 5.00 p.m. on 14th December 2020
Coming into force
16th December 2020
The Secretary of State makes the following Regulations in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 45C(1), (3)(c), (4)(b), (4)(d), 45F(2) and 45P of the Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984(1).
These Regulations are made in response to the serious and imminent threat to public health which is posed by the incidence and spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in England.
The Secretary of State considers that the restrictions and requirements imposed by the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) Regulations 2020(2) as amended by these Regulations are proportionate to what they seek to achieve, which is a public health response to that threat.
In accordance with section 45R of that Act, the Secretary of State is of the opinion that, by reason of urgency, it is necessary to make this instrument without a draft having been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(1)
1984 c. 22. Part 2A was inserted by section 129 of the Health and Social Care Act 2008 (c. 14).
(2)
S.I. 2020/1374.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2020.
(2) These Regulations come into force on 16th December 2020.Amendments to the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) Regulations 2020
2.—(1) Schedule 4 of the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) Regulations 2020 is amended as follows.
(2) In Part 1 (Tier 2 area)—
(a)
omit the following—
(i)
“Essex County Council”;
(ii)
“Hertfordshire County Council”;
(iii)
“Southend-on-Sea Borough Council”;
(iv)
“Thurrock Borough Council”;
(v)
“London:” and the entries under that heading from “City of Westminster” to “The Sub-Treasurer, in respect of the Inner Temple and the Under Treasurer, in respect of the Middle Temple”;
(b)
after “Central Bedfordshire Council”, insert—
“Colchester Borough Council
Dacorum Borough Council
East Hertfordshire District Council”;
(c)
after “Norfolk County Council”, insert—
“North Hertfordshire District Council”;
(d)
after “Peterborough City Council”, insert—
“Stevenage Borough Council
St Albans City and District Council”;
(e)
after “Suffolk County Council”, insert—
“Tendring District Council
Uttlesford District Council
Welwyn Hatfield Borough Council”.
(3) In Part 2 (Tier 3 area)—
(a)
after “Wolverhampton Borough Council”, insert—
“East of England:
Basildon Borough Council
Braintree District Council
Brentwood Borough Council
Broxbourne Borough Council
Castle Point Borough Council
Chelmsford City Council
Epping Forest District Council
Harlow District Council
Hertsmere Borough Council
Maldon District Council
Rochford District Council
Southend-on-Sea Borough Council
Three Rivers District Council
Thurrock Council
Watford Borough Council”;
(b)
after “Slough Borough Council”, insert—
“London:
City of Westminster
London Borough of Barking and Dagenham
London Borough of Barnet
London Borough of Bexley
London Borough of Brent
London Borough of Bromley
London Borough of Camden
London Borough of Croydon
London Borough of Ealing
London Borough of Enfield
London Borough of Hackney
London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham
London Borough of Haringey
London Borough of Harrow
London Borough of Havering
London Borough of Hillingdon
London Borough of Hounslow
London Borough of Islington
London Borough of Lambeth
London Borough of Lewisham
London Borough of Merton
London Borough of Newham
London Borough of Redbridge
London Borough of Richmond upon Thames
London Borough of Southwark
London Borough of Sutton
London Borough of Tower Hamlets
London Borough of Waltham Forest Council
London Borough of Wandsworth Council
Royal Borough of Greenwich
Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea
Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames
The Common Council, in respect of the City of London
The Sub-Treasurer, in respect of the Inner Temple and the Under Treasurer, in respect of the Middle Temple”.Matt Hancock
Secretary of State
Department of Health and Social Care
At 3.00 p.m. on 14th December 2020EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Regulations)
These Regulations make changes to the areas which are subject to the restrictions for Tier 2 and Tier 3, as defined in Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (All Tiers) (England) Regulations 2020.
No impact assessment has been prepared for these Regulations.