Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2022 No. [****]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Fylde (Electoral Changes) Order 2022
Made
***
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”) the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated November 2021(3) stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the borough of Fylde. The Commission has decided to give effect to the recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before Parliament and a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c. 20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.
(3)
The report is available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-west/lancashire/fylde.Citation, commencement, extent and application
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Fylde (Electoral Changes) Order 2022.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on 15th October 2022.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary or relating to the election of councillors, on 15th October 2022;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors in England(1) in 2023.
(4) This Order extends to England and Wales but applies in relation to England only.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c. 2), as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c. 50), renumbered by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29), and further amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order, “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Fylde (Electoral Changes) Order 2022”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-west/lancashire/fylde.Wards of the borough of Fylde and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the borough of Fylde are abolished.
(2) The borough of Fylde is divided into the 17 wards listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Bryning-with-Warton, Freckleton and St Anne’s-on-the-Sea
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Bryning-with-Warton, Freckleton and St Anne’s-on-the-Sea are abolished.
(2) The parish of Bryning-with-Warton is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Freckleton is divided into the two parish wards listed in the first column of Table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of St Anne’s-on-the-Sea is divided into the eight parish wards listed in the first column of Table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(6) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Wards of the borough of Fylde
(1)
Name of ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Ansdell & Fairhaven 2
Ashton 3
Carnegie 2
Freckleton Village 2
Heyhouses 3
Kilgrimol 2
Kilnhouse 3
Kirkham 3
Lytham East 2
Lytham West 2
Medlar-with-Wesham 2
Park 2
Rural East Fylde 2
Rural North Fylde 2
Staining 1
Warton 2
Wrea Green with Westby 2Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Bryning-with-Warton
(1)
Names of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Bryning 1
Warton 8
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Freckleton
(1)
Names of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Freckleton Village  10
Outer Freckleton  2
Table 3
Wards of the parish of St Anne’s-on-the-Sea
(1)
Names of parish wards
(2)
Number of councillors
Ashton North 1
Ashton South 1
Carnegie  2
Heyhouses 2
Kilgrimol  2
Kilnhouse East 1
Kilnhouse West 2
Park  1EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the borough of Fylde following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the borough remains unchanged.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the borough of Fylde and replaces them with 17 new ones for the purpose of elections held on or after the ordinary day of election of councillors in England in 2023. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards that are consequential on the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 1st Floor, Windsor House, 50 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0TL.
The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/all-reviews/north-west/lancashire/fylde.
A full impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.