S T A T U T O R Y  R U L E S  O F  N O R T H E R N  I R E L A N D  
2021 No. 238 
ROAD TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
The Road Races (Cookstown 100 Motor Cycle Road Race) 
Order (Northern Ireland) 2021 
Made 
- 
- 
- 
- 
16th August 2021 
Coming into operation - 
9th September 2021 
The Department for Infrastructure(a), in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 3 of the Road 
Races (Northern Ireland) Order 1986(b) and now vested in it(c), and after consulting the Chief 
Constable, orders and declares as follows. 
Citation and commencement 
1. This Order may be cited as The Road Races (Cookstown 100 Motor Cycle Road Race) Order 
(Northern Ireland) 2021 and shall come into operation on 9th September 2021. 
Interpretation 
2.—(1) In this Order— 
“the course” means the roads specified in the Schedule; 
“marshal” means a person of at least 18 years of age authorised in writing by the promoter to 
assist in connection with the proper conduct of the race; and 
“the promoter” means the Cookstown & District Motor Cycle Club (Road Racing) Ltd. 
(2) For the purpose of Articles 5 and 11, the “date of the race” means the first date on which the 
course may be used by the promoter for motor races. 
Application 
3. Subject to compliance with all the requirements of this Order, the course may be used by the 
promoter for motor races on Friday 10th September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 9.30 p.m. and 
Saturday 11th September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 7.30 p.m.  
Suspension of right of way and notice 
4. On Friday 10th September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 9.30 p.m. or until the time the race is 
announced by the promoter as completed, whichever is the earlier, and on Saturday 11th 
September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 7.30 p.m. or until the time of the race is announced by the 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) Formerly the Department for Regional Development; see section 1(6) and (11) of, and Schedule 1 to, the Departments Act 
(Northern Ireland) 2016 (2016 c. 5 (N.I.)) 
(b) S.I. 1986/1887 (N.I. 17) 
(c) S.R. 1999 No. 481 Article 6(d) and Schedule 4 Part IV 
 
2
promoter as completed, whichever is earlier, the right of way on the course of all persons, vehicles 
and other forms of traffic shall be suspended other than to— 
(a) persons appointed by the promoter as officials or marshals, constables, vehicles engaged 
in the race, persons in charge of or directly employed in connection with such vehicles 
and vehicles used by such officials, marshals, or constables; 
(b) vehicles used to cross the course in an emergency by a medical practitioner or for fire and 
rescue, ambulance or police purposes; and 
(c) persons with or without vehicles who reside in the race area crossing the course or 
proceeding on it for that purpose and persons so proceeding or crossing the course with or 
without vehicles in pursuance of statutory powers or duties; 
provided that such persons and vehicles referred to in (b) and (c) shall cross the course only at 
such times and places as may be specified by a person appointed by the promoter as the clerk of 
the course. 
5. The promoter shall give notice to the inhabitants of the districts adjoining the course of the 
temporary suspension of the right of way thereon by— 
(a) posting, not later than 7 days before the date of the race, placard notices specifying the 
course, the date on which, and the times during which, the right of way is suspended, in 
prominent positions in the neighbourhood and in particular near the junction of all other 
roads within or adjoining the course; and 
(b) publishing, during each of the 2 weeks preceding the date of the race, advertisements 
giving information as in paragraph (a) in 2 newspapers circulating in the locality of the 
course. 
Prohibition of traffic 
6. It shall not be lawful to cause or permit traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, to use or remain 
on that part of any road between the barricades and its junction with the course during the periods 
when the right of way on the course is suspended. 
Cordoning off of the course 
7. The promoter shall— 
(a) close every road opening off the course by means of a proper and sufficient barricade or 
barricades placed at least 10 metres from the course; 
(b) place notice boards on every road at or in the vicinity of the barricades stating that the 
right of way on the course is temporarily suspended; 
(c) ensure that the barricades and notice boards referred to in this Article are— 
(i) in position at least one hour before the start of the race; and 
(ii) removed within one hour after the end of the race; and 
(d) take all steps necessary to prohibit spectators and other persons, other than the promoter’s 
officials, marshals and constables, from using the carriageway or sides of the course 
during the progress of the race. 
8. The promoter shall not open the course to traffic until the last competitor has finished. 
Traffic Management Plan 
9. The promoter shall— 
(a) agree a traffic management plan with the Department and the Chief Constable, and 
provide and place signs to enable persons to avoid the course; and 
(b) ensure that the signs referred to in this Article are— 
(i) placed in position at least 48 hours before the start of the race; and 
 
3
(ii) removed within 24 hours after the end of the race. 
Provision of marshals 
10. The promoter shall— 
(a) provide a sufficient number of marshals for the proper conduct of the race; 
(b) place marshals at the junction of each road, laneway and accommodation road adjoining 
the course and also at such intervals of about 45 metres alternatively on each side of the 
course; and 
(c) provide each marshal with at least an armlet of distinguishing colour which shall be worn 
by the marshal during the period when the right of way on the course is suspended. 
Documents to be produced to the Department 
11. Not less than 14 days before the date of the race the promoter shall lodge with the 
Department a copy of the particulars of the promoter’s proposed arrangements for the conduct of 
the race and shall make such further arrangements as the Chief Constable may consider desirable 
in the interests of public safety. 
Insurance and indemnities 
12.—(1) The promoter shall have secured insurances and indemnities as follows— 
(a) the promoter is indemnified by a policy of insurance effected with an approved Insurance 
Company or Lloyd’s Underwriters for the sum as specified in paragraph (2)(a), which the 
promoter, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or servants, any competitor in the 
race, the Crown or any servants of the Crown or any constable may become legally liable 
to pay for compensation and litigation expenses in respect of the death of, or bodily injury 
to, any person, or the loss of, or damage to, lands or property adjoining the course caused 
by or arising out of the race, provided that such a policy of insurance may exclude any 
claim made by one competitor against another arising out of accidents occurring during 
the race; and 
(b) the promoter shall have so effected as in sub-paragraph (a) a personal accident policy of 
insurance for such benefits as are specified in paragraph (2)(b) in respect of the death of, 
or bodily injury to, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or servants, the servants of 
the Crown, constables and members of voluntary medical services solely in connection 
with or arising out of the holding of the race. 
(2) The specified sums are— 
(a) liability of the promoter, the promoter’s officials, marshals, agents or servants, the Crown 
or any servants of the Crown or any constable or any competitor in the race, £30,000,000 
for any one accident or series of accidents arising out of one occurrence, but unlimited in 
amount as to the total sum payable; and 
(b) in respect of death of, or bodily injury to, any of those persons mentioned in paragraph 
(1)(b) the following benefits— 
(i) death, £65,000; 
(ii) total loss by physical severance of two limbs or total and irrecoverable loss of all 
sight in both eyes or total loss by physical severance of one limb together with the 
total and irrecoverable loss of all sight in one eye, £65,000; 
(iii) total loss by physical severance of one limb or total and irrecoverable loss of all sight 
in one eye, £65,000; 
(iv) permanent total disablement, £65,000; 
(v) temporary total disablement necessarily preventing such person from attending to 
business or occupation or necessarily confining such person to hospital or similar 
 
4
institution or to such person’s house or apartment, £200 weekly limited to 104 
weeks. 
 
 
Sealed with the Official Seal of the Department for Infrastructure on 16th August 2021 
 
(L.S.) 
 
D J Millar 
 
A senior officer of the Department for Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
Article 2 
ROADS IN COUNTY TYRONE COMPRISING THE COURSE 
 
1. 
Orritor Road, Route C612, from its junction with Mackenny Road, Unclassified No. 731, to 
a point 300 metres east of its junction with Gortnagross Road, Unclassified No. 730. 
2. 
Gortnagross Road, Unclassified No. 730, from its junction with Orritor Road, Route C612, 
to its junction with Tullagh Road, Unclassified No. 730. 
3. 
Tullagh Road, Unclassified No. 730, from its junction with Gortnagross Road, Unclassified 
No. 730, to a point 200 metres south-west of its junction with Mackenny Road, Unclassified 
No. 731. 
4. 
Mackenny Road, Unclassified No. 731, from its junction with Tullagh Road, Unclassified 
No. 730, to its junction with Orritor Road, Route C612. 
5. 
Killycurragh Road, Route C616, from its junction with Orritor Road, Route C612, to a point 
230 metres north of that junction to its junction with Craigs Road, Unclassified No. 723. 
6. 
Drumearn Road, Unclassified No. 722, from its junction with Orritor Road, Route C612, to 
a point 300 metres north of that junction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
This Order permits the Cookstown & District Motor Cycle Club (Road Racing) Ltd, as promoter 
of the Cookstown 100 Motor Cycle Road Race 2021, to use for that event certain roads by 
suspending the right of way of other traffic on Friday 10th September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 9.30 
p.m. and Saturday 11th September 2021 from 7.00 a.m. to 7.30 p.m. 
In effect this Order temporarily closes these roads. 
This Order requires the promoter to give public notice of the promoter’s intended use of these 
roads by displaying placard notices in prominent positions in the neighbourhood of the road and 
by publishing advertisements in 2 local newspapers. The promoter must also provide marshals, 
seal off the road and arrange insurance to cover death, bodily injury or loss or damage to property 
resulting from the event. 
 
5
It is an offence for any person— 
(a) to obstruct or interfere wilfully and unlawfully with the conduct of the event; 
(b) to obstruct any constable acting in the course of that constable’s duty or any marshal or 
any other person exercising any function conferred on that person; 
(c) to enter or remain without authority on any road closed for the event; 
(d) to keep any animal or any vehicle without lawful authority on any specified road; or 
(e) to contravene wilfully any provision of a road closing Order or any traffic direction given 
by the police for the purposes of the event. 
