STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2023 No. 878
OFFICIAL STATISTICS
The Official Statistics Order 2023
Made
27th July 2023
Coming into force
28th July 2023
The Minister of State makes the following Order in exercise of the powers conferred by section 6(1)(b) and (2) of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007(1).
In accordance with section 6(3) of that Act, the Minister has consulted the Statistics Board.
In accordance with section 65(2) of that Act, a draft of this instrument was laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
(1)
2007 c. 18.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Official Statistics Order 2023.
(2) This Order comes into force on the day after the day on which it is made.Revocation
2.  The Official Statistics Order 2018(1) is revoked.
(1)
S.I. 2018/888.Official statistics
3.—(1) To the extent that they are not otherwise official statistics by virtue of section 6(1)(a) of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007, the statistics produced or to be produced by the persons listed in the Schedule to this Order are specified as official statistics for the purposes of section 6(1)(b) of that Act.
(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to statistics which are wholly Scottish devolved statistics or wholly Northern Ireland devolved statistics(1).
(1)
“Scottish devolved statistics” and “Northern Ireland devolved statistics” are defined by section 66 of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007 (c. 18) as amended by the section 69 of, and paragraph 69 of Schedule 6 to, the Wales Act 2017 (c. 4).Neville-Rolfe
Minister of State
Cabinet Office
27th July 2023Article 3(1)
SCHEDULE
The Arts Council of England.
The Board of the Pension Protection Fund.
The British Film Institute.
The British Tourist Authority.
The British Transport Police Authority.
The Care Quality Commission.
The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service.
The Coal Authority.
The Commission for Equality and Human Rights.
The Consumer Council for Water.
The Consumer Panel established under section 16 of the Communications Act 2003(1).
The English Sports Council.
The Environment Agency.
The Financial Conduct Authority.
The Gambling Commission.
His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services.
The Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England.
The Homes and Communities Agency.
The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority.
The Independent Office for Police Conduct.
JISC(2).
The Joint Nature Conservation Committee.
The Judicial Appointments Commission.
The Marine Management Organisation.
The National Health Service Litigation Authority.
Natural England.
The NHS Business Services Authority.
NHS England.
The Office for Students.
The Office of Communications.
The Parole Board.
The Passengers’ Council.
The Pensions Regulator.
The Regulator of Social Housing.
The Sentencing Council for England and Wales.
The Service Complaints Ombudsman.
Skills for Care Limited(3).
The Student Loans Company Limited(4).
The Trade Remedies Authority.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
The Youth Justice Board for England and Wales.
(1)
2003 c. 21.
(2)
A company incorporated under the Companies Acts with the registration number 05747339.
(3)
A company incorporated under the Companies Acts with the registration number 03866683.
(4)
A company incorporated under the Companies Acts with the registration number 02401034.EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
Section 6(1)(a) of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007 (c. 18) (“the Act”) provides that statistics produced by the Statistics Board, a government department, the Scottish Administration, a Welsh ministerial authority, a Northern Ireland department, or any other person acting on behalf of the Crown are official statistics. Section 6(1)(b) of the Act provides that such other statistics as may be specified by order by a Minister of the Crown, the Scottish Ministers, the Welsh Ministers or a Northern Ireland department are also official statistics.
This Order specifies the statistics produced, or to be produced, by the persons listed in the Schedule as official statistics, to the extent that they are not otherwise official statistics by virtue of section 6(1)(a) of the Act and are not wholly Scottish devolved statistics or wholly Northern Ireland devolved statistics. This Order revokes the Official Statistics Order 2018 (S.I. 2018/888) (“the 2018 Order”) and provides a revised list of persons.
The Schedule lists forty-one persons, omitting five persons from the list contained in the 2018 Order: these are the Health and Social Care Information Centre; the Higher Education Statistics Agency Limited; Monitor; the National Health Service Trust Development Authority and the Natural Environment Research Council.
The Schedule adds five persons: these are the Commission for Equality and Human Rights; JISC; the Regulator of Social Housing; Skills for Care Limited and the Trade Remedies Authority.
The Schedule lists two bodies under a different name: the body listed in the 2018 Order as the National Health Service Commissioning Board is listed in this Order as NHS England; the body listed in the 2018 Order as Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Constabulary is listed in this Order as His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services.
The persons listed in the Schedule include a number of registered charities, but this Order does not impose any additional burdens on them.
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no, or no significant, impact on the private, voluntary or public sectors is foreseen.