W E L S H  S T A T U T O R Y  
I N S T R U M E N T S  
2023 No. 730 (W. 114) 
ROAD TRAFFIC, WALES 
The A48 Trunk Road (Cross Hands 
Roundabout to Pont Abraham 
Roundabout, Carmarthenshire) 
(Temporary Traffic Prohibitions and 
Restrictions) Order 2023 
Made 
29 June 2023 
Coming into force 
10 July 2023 
The Welsh Ministers, as traffic authority for the 
relevant lengths of the A48 Trunk Road, are satisfied 
that traffic on specified lengths of the trunk road 
should be restricted and/or prohibited because of 
works proposed on or near the road. 
The Welsh Ministers, therefore, in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon them by section 14(1), (4) and 
(7) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984(1), make 
this Order. 
Title and commencement   
1. The title of this Order is the A48 Trunk Road 
(Cross 
Hands 
Roundabout 
to 
Pont 
Abraham 
Roundabout, Carmarthenshire) (Temporary Traffic 
Prohibitions and Restrictions) Order 2023 and this 
Order comes into force on 10 July 2023. 
Interpretation 
2. In this Order— 
“exempted vehicle” (“cerbyd esempt”) means— 
                                                                               
(1) 
1984 c. 27; section 14 was substituted by the Road Traffic   
(Temporary Restrictions) Act 1991 (c. 26), section 1(1) and 
Schedule 1.  By virtue of S.I. 1999/672, and section 162 of, 
and paragraph 30 of Schedule 11 to, the Government of 
Wales Act 2006 (c. 32), these powers are now exercisable by 
the Welsh Ministers in relation to Wales. 
 
2
(a) any vehicle being used for the purposes 
described in section 87 of the Road Traffic 
Regulation Act 1984 Act(1) or in connection 
with the works giving rise to this Order; 
(b) any vehicle being used for naval,       military 
or air force purposes and being driven by a 
person for the time being subject to the orders 
of a member of the armed forces of the 
Crown, who is a member of the special 
forces— 
(i) in 
response, 
or 
for 
practice 
in           
responding, 
to 
a 
national 
security 
emergency  by a person who has been 
trained in driving at high speeds; or 
(ii) for the purpose of training a person          
in driving vehicles at high speeds; 
“special forces” (“lluoedd arbennig”) means those 
units of the armed forces the maintenance of 
whose capabilities is the responsibility of the 
Director of Special Forces or which are for the 
time being subject to the operational command of 
that Director; 
“the trunk road” (“y gefnffordd”) means the 
lengths of the A48 London to Fishguard trunk 
road;  
“works period” (“cyfnod y gwaith”) means 
intermittent periods commencing at 19:00 hours on 
10 July 2023 and ending when the temporary 
traffic signs for each period of works are removed. 
Prohibitions and Restrictions 
3. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any vehicle, other than an exempted vehicle, on the 
lengths of the trunk road specified in Schedule 1 to this 
Order. 
4. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 50 miles per 
hour on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 2 to this Order. 
5. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 40 miles per 
hour on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 2 and 3 to this Order. 
6. No person may, during the works period, drive 
any motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 10 miles per 
                                                                               
(1) 
Section 87 was amended by the Fire and Rescue Services 
Act  2004 (c. 21), Schedule 1, paragraph 55, the Serious 
Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), Schedule 4, 
paragraph 42, the Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), 
Schedule 8, paragraph 29(2) and the Deregulation Act 2015 
(c. 20), section 50(4) and (5). 
 
3
hour on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 4 to this Order. 
7. No person may, during the works period, use or 
permit the use of a vehicle, other than an exempted 
vehicle, in such a way that it overtakes any other 
vehicle on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedule 4 to this Order during such times as the 
restriction referred to in article 6 is in operation. 
Suspensions 
8. Any statutory provisions restricting the speed of 
vehicles on the lengths of the trunk road specified in 
Schedules 2, 3 and 4 are suspended during such times 
as the restrictions specified in articles 4, 5 and 6 are in 
operation. 
Application 
9.—(1) The prohibitions and restrictions in articles 3 
4, 5, 6 and 7 apply only during such times and to such 
extent as indicated by traffic signs. 
   (2) No speed limit imposed by this Order applies to 
an exempted vehicle. 
Duration of this Order 
10. The maximum duration of this Order is 18 
months. 
 
Signed on behalf of the Deputy Minister for Climate 
Change, acting under the authority of the Minister for 
Climate Change, one of the Welsh Ministers. 
 
Dated the                                  29 June 2023 
 
 
 
Nicci Hunter 
Business Team Leader  
Welsh Government 
 
 
SCHEDULE 1 
 
Temporary Prohibition of Vehicles  
 
1. The entire length of the eastbound entry slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from the 
give way markings of the roundabout east of Meadows 
Bridge to its physical nosing with the eastbound 
carriageway. 
 
4
2. The entire length of the westbound exit slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from its 
physical nosing with the westbound carriageway to  
the give way markings of the roundabout west of 
Meadows Bridge. 
3. The length of the eastbound carriageway that 
extends from its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Cross Hands Roundabout to its junction 
with the main circulatory carriageway at Pont 
Abraham Roundabout. 
4. The length of the westbound carriageway that 
extends from its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Pont Abraham Roundabout to its 
junction with the main circulatory carriageway at 
Cross Hands Roundabout. 
 
SCHEDULE 2 
 
Temporary 40 mph or 50 mph Speed Limit  
 
1. The length of the eastbound carriageway that 
extends from a point 128 metres south east of its 
junction with the main circulatory carriageway at 
Cross Hands Roundabout to a point 600 metres north 
west of its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Pont Abraham Roundabout. 
2. The length of the eastbound entry slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from a point 
77 metres east of the give way markings of the 
roundabout east of Meadows Bridge to its physical 
nosing with the eastbound carriageway. 
3. The length of the eastbound exit slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from its 
physical nosing with the eastbound carriageway to a 
point 83 metres west of the give way markings of the 
roundabout east of Meadows Bridge. 
4. The length of the westbound carriageway that 
extends from its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Pont Abraham Roundabout to a point 
128 metres east of its junction with the main 
circulatory carriageway at Cross Hands Roundabout. 
5. The length of the westbound entry slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from a point 
83 metres west of the give way markings of the 
roundabout west of Meadows Bridge to its physical 
nosing with the westbound carriageway. 
6. The length of the westbound exit slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from its 
physical nosing with the westbound carriageway to a 
point 78 metres east of the give way markings of the 
roundabout west of Meadows Bridge. 
 
 
5
SCHEDULE 3 
 
Temporary 40 mph Speed Limit  
The length of the eastbound carriageway that extends 
from a point 600 metres north of Pont Abraham 
Roundabout to its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Pont Abraham Roundabout. 
 
SCHEDULE 4 
 
Temporary 10 mph Speed Limit and 
No Overtaking 
 
1. The length of the eastbound carriageway that 
extends from its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Cross Hands Roundabout to its junction 
with the main circulatory carriageway at Pont 
Abraham Roundabout. 
2. The length of the eastbound entry slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from the 
give way markings of the roundabout east of Meadows 
Bridge to its physical nosing with the eastbound 
carriageway. 
3. The length of the eastbound exit slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from its 
physical nosing with the eastbound carriageway to the 
give way markings of the roundabout east of Meadows 
Bridge. 
4. The length of the westbound carriageway that 
extends from its junction with the main circulatory 
carriageway at Pont Abraham Roundabout to its 
junction with the main circulatory carriageway at 
Cross Hands Roundabout. 
5. The length of the westbound entry slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from the 
give way markings west of Meadows Bridge to its 
physical nosing with the westbound carriageway. 
6. The length of the westbound exit slip road at 
Meadows Bridge Interchange that extends from its 
physical nosing with the westbound carriageway to  
the give way markings of the roundabout west of 
Meadows Bridge. 
