Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 59(9) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009; draft to lie for forty days pursuant to section 6(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946, during which period either House of Parliament may resolve that the Order be not made.
DRAFT STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
2018 No. 0000
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, ENGLAND
The Forest of Dean (Electoral Changes) Order 2018
Made
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) and (3)
Under section 58(4) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009(1) (“the Act”), the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(2) (“the Commission”) published a report dated 16th January 2018 stating its recommendations for changes to the electoral arrangements for the district of Forest of Dean. The Commission has decided to give effect to those recommendations.
A draft of the instrument has been laid before each House of Parliament, a period of forty days has expired since the day on which it was laid and neither House has resolved that the instrument be not made.
The Commission makes the following Order in exercise of the power conferred by section 59(1) and (4) of the Act.
(1)
2009 c.20.
(2)
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established on 1st April 2010 by section 55(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009.Citation and commencement
1.—(1) This Order may be cited as the Forest of Dean (Electoral Changes) Order 2018.
(2) This article and article 2 come into force on the day after the day on which this Order is made.
(3) Articles 3 and 4 come into force—
(a)
for the purpose of proceedings preliminary, or relating, to the election of councillors, on the day after the day on which this Order is made;
(b)
for all other purposes, on the ordinary day of election of councillors(1) in 2019.
(1)
The ordinary day of election of councillors in England and Wales is prescribed by section 37(1) of the Representation of the People Act 1983 (c.2) as amended by section 18(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1985 (c.50) and by paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c.29) and as prospectively amended by section 6(16) of the Wales Act 2017 (c.4).Interpretation
2.—(1) In this Order “the map” means the map marked “Map referred to in the Forest of Dean (Electoral Changes) Order 2018”, held by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England(1).
(2) Where a boundary is shown on the map as running along a road, railway line, footway, watercourse or similar geographical feature, it is to be treated as running along the centre line of the feature.
(1)
Prints of the map are available for inspection at reasonable times at the principal office of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 14th floor, Millbank Tower, London SW1P 4QP. It is also accessible online at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/current-reviews/south-west/gloucestershire/forest-of-deanWards of the district of Forest of Dean and number of councillors
3.—(1) The existing wards of the district of Forest of Dean are abolished.
(2) The district of Forest of Dean is divided into 21 wards as listed in the first column of the table in Schedule 1.
(3) Each ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the ward.
(4) The number of councillors to be elected for each ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the table in Schedule 1.Wards of the parishes of Cinderford, Coleford, Lydney and West Dean
4.—(1) The existing wards of the parishes of Cinderford, Coleford, Lydney and West Dean are abolished.
(2) The parish of Cinderford is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 1 in Schedule 2.
(3) The parish of Coleford is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 2 in Schedule 2.
(4) The parish of Lydney is divided into the three parish wards listed in the first column of table 3 in Schedule 2.
(5) The parish of West Dean is divided into the six parish wards listed in the first column of table 4 in Schedule 2.
(6) Each parish ward comprises the area identified on the map by reference to the name of the parish ward.
(7) The number of councillors to be elected for each parish ward is the number specified in relation to that ward in the second column of the relevant table in Schedule 2.Sealed with the seal of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Name
Chief Executive
Local Government Boundary Commission for England
DateArticle 3
SCHEDULE 1
Names of district wards and number of councillors
(1)
Name of district ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Berry Hill 2
Bream 2
Cinderford East 2
Cinderford West 2
Coleford 3
Dymock 1
Hartpury & Redmarley 2
Longhope & Huntley 2
Lydbrook 1
Lydney East 3
Lydney North 1
Lydney West & Aylburton 1
Mitcheldean, Ruardean & Drybrook 3
Newent & Taynton 3
Newland & Sling 1
Newnham 2
Pillowell 1
Ruspidge 1
St.Briavels 1
Tidenham 3
Westbury-on-Severn 1Article 4
SCHEDULE 2
Names of parish wards and number of councillors
Table 1
Wards of the parish of Cinderford
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Cinderford East 7
Cinderford North 1
Cinderford West 7
Table 2
Wards of the parish of Coleford
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Central 5
East 5
Mile End & Broadwell 3
Table 3
Wards of the parish of Lydney
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Lydney East 10
Lydney North 3
Lydney West 2
Table 4
Wards of the parish of West Dean
(1)
Name of parish ward
(2)
Number of councillors
Berry Hill 2
Bream 5
Christchurch 1
Ellwood & Sling 2
Parkend 2
Pillowell 3EXPLANATORY NOTE
(This note is not part of the Order)
This Order makes changes to electoral arrangements for the district of Forest of Dean following recommendations made by the Local Government Boundary Commission for England. The area of the district remains unchanged. The changes made by this Order apply in respect of local government elections held on and after the ordinary day of election of councillors in 2019.
Article 3 abolishes the existing electoral wards of the district of Forest of Dean and replaces them with 21 new ones. It establishes the names and areas of the new electoral wards and the number of councillors for each.
Article 4 makes changes to parish wards which are consequential to the changes made by article 3.
The area covered by each ward created by this Order is identified on a map which is available for inspection at reasonable times at the offices of the Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 14th floor, Millbank Tower, London SW1P 4QP. The map may also be accessed at https://www.lgbce.org.uk/current-reviews/south-west/gloucestershire/forest-of-dean
An impact assessment has not been produced for this instrument as no impact on the private or voluntary sectors is foreseen.